



　　Loveor Money by Romena Akinyemi


　　Mary Queen of Scots by Tim Vicary


　　Under the Moon by Romena Akinyemi


　　The Witches of Pendle by Rowena Akinyemi


　　The Phantom of the Opera by Jennifer Bassett


　　The Monkey's Paw by W.W. Jacobs


　　The Elephant Man by Tim Vicary


　　The Coldest Place On Earth by Tim Vicary



　　WilliamShakespeare by Jannifer Bassett


　　The Love of a King by Peter Dainty


　　Dead Man's Island by John Escott


　　The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain


　　Robinson Cruso by Daniel Defoe


　　Alice's Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll


　　Anne of Green Gables by LM Montgomery


　　Five Children and It by Edith Nesbit




　　Frankenstein by Mary Shelley


　　The Call of the Wild by Jack London


　　The Secret Garden by Frances Hodgson Burnett


　　The Prisoner of Zenda by Anthony Hope


　　Alice's Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll


　　The Wind in the Willow by Kenneth Grahame


　　Tales of Mystery and Imagination by Edgar Allan Poe



　　A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens


　　The PictureofDorianGrayby Oscar Wilde


　　The Bronte Story by Tim Vicary


　　Tooth And Claw by Saki


　　The Star Zoo by Harry Gilbert


　　Kidnapped byRobertStevenson



　　Chemical Secret by Tim Vicary




　　The Hound of the Baskervilles by Arthur Conan Doyle


　　The Unquiet Grave by M.R.James


　　Three Men in a Boat by Jerome K.Jerome


　　The Thirty Nine Steps by John Buchan


　　Little Women by Louisa May Alcott



　　Black Beauty by Anna Sewell


　　Silas Marner by George Eliot


　　A Tale of Two Cities by Charles Dickens


　　Gulliver's Travels by Jonathan Swift


　　Treasure Island by Robert Louis Stevenson


　　Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde by Robert Louis Stevenson



　　Great Expectations by Charles Dickens


　　David Copperfield by Charles Dickens


　　Wuthering Heights by Emily Bronte


　　Far From The Madding Crowd by Thomas Hardy



　　Jane Eyre by Charlotte Bronte


　　Oliver Twist by Charles Dickens



　　Tess of the D’urbervilles by Thomas Hardy








　　Love or Money by Romena Akinyemi







■ 1 Chapter
　　The Clarkson family lived in the country near Cambridge，about half a mile from the nearest village and about a mile from the river．They had a big，old house with a beautiful garden，a lot of flowers and many old．trees．
　　One Thursday morning in July，Jackie came in from the garden．She was a tall，fat woman，thirty years old．It was the hottest day of the year，but she wore a warm brown skirt and yellow shirt．She went into the kitchen to get a drink of water．Just then the phone rang．
　　'Cambridge 1379，'Jackie said．
　　'Hello．This is Diane．I want to talk to Mother．'
　　'Mother isn't here，'Jackie said．'She's at the doctor's．'
　　'Why？What's Wrong？'
　　'Nothing's wrong，'Jackie said．'Why are you telephoning？ You are going to come this weekend？ Mother wants everyone to be here．'
　　'Yes，I want to come，'Diane said．'I'm phoning because I have no money for the train ticket．'
　　'No money！Mother is always giving you money！'
　　'This phone call is very expensive，'Diane said coldly．'Tell Mother please．I need the money．'
　　Jackie put the phone down．She took a cigarette from her bag and began to smoke．She felt angry because her sister al-ways asked for money．Diane was twenty years old， the youngest in the family．She lived in London，in one room of a big house．She wanted to be a singer．She sang very well but she could never get work．
　　Jackie went back into the kitchen and began to make some sandwiches．Just then the back door opened，and her mother came in．
　　'It's very hot！'Molly said．She took off her hat and put it down on the table．She was a tall，dark woman with beautiful eyes．
　　Two big，black dogs came into the kitchen after her and ran across to her．She sat down and put her hands on their heads．
　　Jackie put the sandwiches on the table．'Mother，'she said，'Diane phoned．She wants money for her train ticket．'
　　Molly closed her eyes for a minute．Then she stood up．'This afternoon I want you to get the house ready for the weekend，'she said．'Oh，and please go to the village later and get my tablets．'
　　'Yes，Mother，'Jackie said．
　　Molly went to the door．
　　'Mother，please wait a minute，'Jackie said．'Peter Hobbs came here this morning．He's very angry with you about that letter．He lost his job，you know．Why did you write to his office？He wants to talk to you about it．'
　　'Well，I don't want to talk to him，'Molly said．She opened the door．
　　'But Mother，you don't understand．He's seventeen，and it was his first job．He's very，very angry．He says… he says he's going to kill you！'
　　Molly did not answer．She went out of the room and closed the door．




■ 1




■ 2 Chapter
　　It was seven o'clock on Saturday evening．Jackie stood at the window．A car drove slowly up to the front door and stopped．A tall man with white hair got out，It was Albert，the husband of Molly's sister．
　　'Here's Uncle Albert，'Jackie said．'Always late．'
　　She went out of the room and opened the front door．Albert came in and went at once to Molly．
　　'Oh，dear．I'm very late．I am sorry，'Albert said．'Fifty years old today！What a wonderful dress！'
　　Molly did not smile．'Thank you，Albert．We're all getting older．'Tonight she wore a long black dress，and the two black dogs sat at her feet．'Everyone is here now．Let's go in to dinner，'she said．
　　Everyone stood up and went to the table．
　　'The table looks nice，Jackie．What wonderful flowers！'Diane said．She was a beautiful girl，with long black hair and dark blue eyes．She wore a long red dress．
　　Albert sat down next to Roger Roger was Molly's son，her second child．He lived in Cambridge，in an expensive house．
　　'Someone called Peter stopped me down the road，'Albert said．'Who is he？ He's very angry with you，Molly．'
　　'That's Peter Hobbs，from the house across the road，'Jackie said quickly．She looked across the table at Molly．'He lost his job last week and he's angry with everyone．'
　　'It's Molly he doesn't like，'Albert said．
　　Molly said nothing．Everyone began to eat．
　　'How is Aunt Annie？'Jackie asked．
　　'She's much worse now，'Albert said．'She stays in bed all the time．She needs a nurse twenty-four hours a day．'
　　'I am sorry，'Molly said．
　　Albert stopped eating and looked at Molly．'It's very difficult and very expensive，you know．Annie feels very unhappy because you don't visit her，Molly．She loves you very much．You are her little sister；you know．'
　　Molly closed her eyes for a minute．' I know that，Albert．I am fifty years old，but I am always her“little”sister．Well，we can talk about it later．'
　　Albert laughed．'Oh yes，we can talk later．It's always later with you，Molly．Always tomorrow．Never today．'
　　Jackie watched her mother．Her mother was angry with Albert．Molly never liked talking about her sister Annie and she did not like visiting her because she was very ill．
　　'That's a beautiful dress，Diane．Is it new？'Jackie asked．
　　'Thank you，Jackie．Yes，it's new，and very expensive．I got it on Wednesday，'Diane said．She smiled at Jackie．
　　'All your things are expensive，'Jackie said．She remembered the phone call on Thursday about the train ticket．
　　'I don't like cheap things，'Diane said．'And I'm going to need more money soon．I want to go to America．Can you help me，Roger？'
　　'Oh no，'Roger said．'Nobody wants to help you， Diane．You don't like working，we all know that，but we all want you to get a job．'
　　Diane laughed．'It doesn't matter，Roger．I don't need your help．Mother always helps me．Mother loves me best．'She suddenly smiled，a quick，beautiful smile．But her eyes were cold．
　　Jackie looked at her mother．Molly's face was white．Jackie did not understand．Was her mother afraid of Diane？Jackie wanted her mother to be happy today．
　　'Would you like some more meat，Uncle Albert？'Jackie asked．'Roger，can you give everyone some more to drink？
　　Roger got up and began to give more wine to everyone．'This is good wine，'he said．
　　Molly smiled for the first time．'Yes，your father loved this wine．He often drank it．'
　　'Yes，'Albert said，and looked at Molly．'Expensive，too．'
　　'Would you like to meet Mr Briggs this weekend，Roger？Jackie asked quickly．'He's the new man at the farm．He wants to meet you．'
　　'Briggs？Briggs？'Molly said，suddenly angry．'Don't talk to me about that man．I don't like him．He wants half my garden for his farm．He needs more land，he says．I don't want him in my house．He's always dirty and he has bad teeth．'
　　Jackie stood up and got her bag．'Excuse me，I want a cigarette．'
　　'Cigarettes！Always a cigarette in your mouth，'Molly said．'I don't like it．Cigarettes aren't good for you．'
　　Jackie began to smoke．She felt angry but she said nothing．She wanted her mother to be happy this evening，but it was very difficult．
　　Roger drank some more wine．'Well，Mother，perhaps Mr Briggs is right．The garden is very big，you know，'he said．'It's a lot of work for you．The house is big，too．You're fifty now．You need to be more careful．'
　　'Roger！I don't need a nurse，you know！I work in the garden every day；I feel happy there．'Molly stood up．'I know you all want my money．You come here for a free dinner，you don't want to see me．You don't love me．You want my house，and my money．Well，you can all wait．No-body is getting more money from me，not before I die！'
　　'Don't say that，Mother！'Jackie cried．
　　Molly walked across the room to the door．'I feel ill now．I'm going upstairs to bed．'
　　Molly left the room．Nobody moved．
　　'One day I'm going to kill that woman，'Diane said quietly．
　　Roger looked at Diane but said nothing．Albert moved his head slowly up and down．'Ill！She's angry，that's all，'he said．'Molly always gets angry about money．Why can't she be good to her sister？Annie's going to die soon．Molly knows that．'
　　Jackie finished her cigarette and stood up．'Would everyone like some coffee？Come into the kitchen and let's drink it there．'




■ 2




■ 3 Chapter
　　Early next morning the house was quiet．Suddenly there was a cry from the room next to Roger's，his mother's room．Roger opened his eyes and looked at the clock．It was nearly seven o'clock．He got out of bed and opened the door quietly．At the same time the door of his mother's room opened and Diane came out．Her face was very white．
　　'Roger！It' s Mother！I brought a cup of coffee for her and I found her dead．She's dead…dead in her bed，'she cried．
　　Roger went quickly to the door of his mother's room and looked in．The window was open but the room was warm．Molly was on the bed，one hand under her head．Roger went across to the bed and put his hand on her arm．It was cold．On the little table next to the bed was a hot cup of coffee and an empty cup．
　　'I'm going to call the doctor，'Diane said．
　　'She's dead，'Roger said slowly．His face，too，was white．'Mother is dead！'
　　Diane walked across the room to the door．'I'm going to phone the doctor，'she said again．
　　'Wait a minute！'Roger called．'Let's tell the family first．'
　　'Family！Nobody loved Mother！'Diane went out and ran downstairs．
　　Roger slowly went downstairs after her and stood by the telephone．
　　'Dr Pratt，this is Diane Clarkson．It's my mother—she's dead．Can you come quickly？'
　　Diane put the phone down．'It isn't true，Roger！Mother dead！Daddy died last winter，and now Mother．'Diane began to cry．
　　'Don't cry，Diane，'Roger said．'Let's go upstairs and tell Uncle Albert and Jackie．'
　　'No！You tell them！Nobody loved Mother．You aren't sorry．Look at you！You want her money．That's all．'
　　Roger suddenly wanted to hit Diane．'Be quiet！'he said．'What about you？You didn't love Mother．You wanted her money，too．Don't forget that！'
　　'It's true，'Diane said．'Oh，I can't stay in this house．I'm going out．I'm going to the river with the dogs．'
　　'No，'Roger said．'The doctor's coming and I want you here．'
　　Diane said nothing．She went into the kitchen and at once the dogs got up and came to her．'Beautiful dogs！Daddy loved you and Mother loved you．Now I'm going to love you．'She opened the back door and went out with the dogs．
　　Roger did not move．He stood by the telephone．'It's true，'he thought．'I am happy about the money．I needed money，and now I'm rich．Things are going to be easier for me now．But Mother…why didn't I love her more？ And now she's dead．'Slowly，Roger went back upstairs．He wanted to dress before Dr Pratt arrived．
　　Dr Pratt was a little fat man without much hair．He was the family doctor and he knew all the Clarkson family very well．He went upstairs at once and looked at Molly's body．He looked carefully at the cup of coffee and the empty cup on the table next to her bed．
　　'I'm sorry，Roger，'he said．'Where is Diane？She phoned me．'
　　'She went out with the dogs，'Roger said．'She was angry with me—angry with everyone．'
　　Dr Pratt said nothing for a minute．'This is going to be very difficult．I'm going to phone the police，Roger．'
　　'Police！Why？What's wrong？
　　'I don't know．Your mother wasn't ill．I saw her on Thursday and she was very well．Why did she die？I don' t understand．I want to find out．'
　　Roger went across to the window and looked out at the gar-den．It was a beautiful summer morning．The sky was blue and the garden was green．It was all very quiet．His mother loved this garden．But Tom Briggs wanted the garden．And Roger wanted the garden，too．Roger felt worse and worse．
　　'Your mother took sleeping tablets，'Dr Pratt said．'Did you know？On Thursday she had a new bottle of tablets，but I can't find it here in her room．'
　　'I didn't know，'Roger said．'Very well．Let's go down-stairs and you can phone the police．'
　　Roger went into the kitchen and made some coffee．Just then Diane came in with the dogs．
　　'Roger，'she said．'Look，I'm sorry．I was angry and said some angry things．'
　　'It doesn't matter，'Roger said．'Here you are，have some coffee．Dr Pratt is phoning the police．Did you know Mother took sleeping tablets？Well，the bottle is not in her room．'
　　'What？I don't understand．'Diane took the coffee and be－gan to drink．Her eyes looked big and dark．
　　Just then Dr Pratt came into the kitchen．'They're coming at once，'he said．'Diane—I'm sorry about your mother．'
　　'Dr Pratt，I want to tell you about last night．Everyone was very angry…'
　　'Be quiet！'Roger said quickly．
　　'Diane never thinks before she opens her mouth，'he thought angrily．
　　Diane did not look at Roger．'Last night Mother went to bed early because everyone…'
　　'Don't tell me，'Dr Pratt said．'You can tell the police．'
　　Roger's face went red．Suddenly he felt afraid．'The police are going to talk to everyone，and ask questions，'he thought．'And they're going to want answers．It's going to be very difficult．'He finished his coffee and stood up．
　　'I'm going upstairs，'he said．'I'm going to tell Uncle Al-bert and Jackie about Mother…and about the police．'




■ 3




■ 4 Chapter
　　The police arrived very quickly．There were a lot of them．Some of them with cameras went upstairs to Molly's room．Two detectives talked to Dr Pratt in the kitchen．The family waited in the sitting room．It was a hot day again and the windows were open．The dogs sat quietly at Diane's feet．Nobody talked．Jackie smoked．They waited for a long time．Suddenly the door opened and the two detectives came in．
　　'Good morning．I am Detective Inspector Walsh and this is Sergeant Foster．'The Inspector did not smile．He was a big man in an old black suit and a black hat and coat．He wore a coat because he always felt cold．'Last night someone put sleeping tablets in Mrs Clarkson's hot milk．We are going to question everybody，and we need a room，please．'
　　Roger stood up．'I'm Roger Clarkson．You can have my father's old office．Come with me，it's along here，'
　　The office was not a very big room，but there was a table and three or four chairs．Roger opened the window．
　　'I would like to talk first to your uncle，Albert King，'In-spector Walsh said．He took off his hat and coat and sat down behind the table．
　　'Of course，'said Roger and left the room．
　　Sergeant Foster waited by the door．He was a very tall young man with black hair and a nice smile．He was not very happy this morning because he usually played tennis on Sunday mornings．He was one of the best players at the Cambridge Tennis Club．
　　Albert came in and sat down．
　　'I'm going to ask some questions，Mr King，'the Inspector said，'and Sergeant Foster is going to write it all down．'
　　Albert looked at his feet．'Yes，yes．It's your job．I know that．'
　　'Tell me about last night，'Inspector Walsh asked quietly．
　　'You were angry with Mrs Clarkson．'
　　Albert looked at Inspector Walsh for the first time．'Yes，I was．Everyone was angry．Roger was angry．Diane wanted money to go to America．Then there's a man called Tom Brig-gs…He wants half the garden for his farm．Molly was a rich woman．I need money because my wife Annie—Molly's sister—is very ill．I told Molly this．'
　　'What happened next？'
　　'Well，Molly was angry with everyone and went upstairs．We went into the kitchen for coffee．Jackie wanted everyone to go up and say good night to Molly．She lives here with Molly so she wanted Molly to be happy．At first Roger said no．He was angry and didn't want to see his mother．'
　　'And did you see Molly in her room？'
　　'Yes．I was tired and I went upstairs first．I went to Molly's room and asked her for money again．But no—there was no money for her sister．'Albert stopped and put his hand over his eyes．
　　Inspector Walsh watched Albert for a minute．'Did you hear noises after you went to bed？'
　　'Everyone went into Molly's room to say good night，I think．Later，I heard someone…He—or she—went down－stairs．That was about midnight．'
　　'Very well，Mr King．Thank you，you can go now．'Albert left the room．
　　Inspector Walsh put his hands behind his head．'What time is it？I'm hungry．We're learning a lot，but I need some coffee．'
　　'Shall I go to the kitchen？'Sergeant Foster asked．
　　'Oh，no．Later．Let's see Jackie Clarkson next．'
　　Jackie came in and sat down．She looked down at her hands and said nothing．
　　'We found the empty bottle of your mother's sleeping tablets in Diane's room，'the Inspector said suddenly．Then he waited．Jackie's face did not change and she said nothing．
　　'Tell me，did your mother get her tablets from the shop in the village？'
　　'Yes．My mother usually took a sleeping tablet every night so she needed a lot of tablets．Sometimes she got them from the shop，sometimes I did．On Thursday，I asked Peter Hobbs to get them．He lives in the house across the road，and he of－ten goes to the village on his bicycle．'
　　'I see．Your mother wanted to stay in this house．How about you？Did you want to move？'
　　Jackie looked up for a minute and then down at her hands a－gain．'This is Mother's house．I loved my mother．She was good to me．'
　　'Did you see your mother in her room last night？'
　　'Yes，everyone did．Diane made hot milk and took it to Mother．She usually drank a cup of hot milk before she slept．'
　　Inspector Walsh put his hands behind his head．Jackie was very quiet．'What did your mother say？'
　　Jackie opened her bag and looked for a cigarette．'Can I smoke？'
　　'Of course．This is your house，'Inspector Walsh said．He watched Jackie．'What did your mother say？'he asked again．
　　'She wanted to go downstairs again．She remembered the dogs—she wanted to get some dinner for them． I went to my room and she went downstairs．'
　　'What time was this？'
　　'I don't remember．About midnight，I think．'
　　'And the cup of hot milk？'
　　'It was on the table by her bed．'
　　'Did you need your mother's money？'
　　'No，Inspector．Money is not important to me．There are more important things，'Jackie said quietly．
　　'Well，your uncle Albert wanted money．Tom Briggs wanted the garden．You wanted nothing？'
　　Jackie finished her cigarette and looked up at the Inspector．Her eyes were suddenly angry．'Don't forget Peter Hobbs．He lost his job because of my mother．He wanted to kill her，you know．And what about Diane？You found the empty bottle in her bag．'
　　Inspector Walsh listened carefully．'We're going to question everyone，Miss Clarkson．'
　　Jackie said nothing for a minute．'Would you like some sandwiches and coffee，Inspector？'
　　'Ah！Yes，please！'Inspector Walsh said warmly．'I would like sandwiches and coffee very much．'
　　Jackie left the room．Inspector Walsh thought about her．Why was she suddenly angry？The room was quiet．




■ 4




■ 5 Chapter
　　After the coffee and sandwiches，Inspector Walsh called Roger Clarkson to the office．Roger came in and sat down．The Inspector began at once．
　　'Now，Mr Clarkson．Why was your mother angry with you last night？'
　　'This house is very big，'Roger said．'It was a lot of work for Mother．I wanted her to move．But no，she loved this house and garden．She didn't want to move．'
　　'Tell me about your job，Mr Clarkson．Your mother is dead and now you're rich．Do you need money？'
　　Roger's face was suddenly afraid．'What are you saying？I didn't kill my mother．I need money，that's true．A friend and I want to build ten houses here，in this garden．We can get a lot of money for them．So．I wanted Mother to sell this house．It's true．But Mr Briggs wanted half the garden，too，you know，for his farm．'
　　Inspector Walsh moved a pencil on the table．'Tell me，what happened upstairs？You went to your mother's room？'
　　'Yes，I did．I wanted to say goodnight to my mother．'
　　'Did you talk about the house again？'
　　'Yes，I did．Again，she said no．She loved the house and didn't want to sell it．'
　　Inspector Walsh watched Roger for a minute．'I see．We found the empty bottle of sleeping tablets，Mr Clarkson，in Diane's room．'
　　Roger's face did not change．'Oh？Someone put them there．Diane did not kill my mother，I know that．She found the body．'
　　'Very well．I would like to see Diane next．'
　　Roger got up and left the room．
　　Inspector Walsh stood up and put his hands in his pockets．He went to the window and looked out at the trees．Why was Roger Clarkson afraid？Was it important？He looked at Sergeant Foster．
　　'Tomorrow morning，go to Mr Clarkson's office-you have the name，'he said．'Ask some questions about him，about his job，friends，money．'
　　Sergeant Foster wrote it down．'Yes，Inspector．'
　　'A good day for tennis，Sergeant？'
　　Sergeant Foster laughed．'Don't say that．It's not easy，you know．I don't like sitting here looking at the sun．'
　　Diane came into the room and sat down．She looked at Sergeant Foster and smiled．'I saw you at the Tennis Club last month，I think．You play very well．'
　　Sergeant Foster's face went red．Inspector Walsh looked at him．'Oh yes．A fast and exciting player is Sergeant Foster．'
　　Diane smiled again at Sergeant Foster and his face went redder．
　　'Well，Miss Clarkson，'Inspector Walsh said，'I want you to talk about last night．'
　　Diane stopped smiling．'Oh，I can talk about last night．I can't stop talking about it．We were all angry．Mother went to bed early and I made hot milk for her．We were all in the kitchen，and Peter Hobbs came in He nearly broke the back door down．'Diane stopped．
　　'Yes？'
　　'He was very angry about a letter．He wanted to kill Mother．Are you going to talk to him？'
　　'We're going to talk to everyone．'
　　'Good．Tom Briggs came into the kitchen，too．Are you going to talk to him？'
　　'I'm asking the questions，Miss Clarkson．When did you take the milk upstairs？'
　　'I went up after Roger．'She stopped for a minute．Then she began again．'I didn't like my mother，Inspector．She killed my father，you know．Last winter，after Christmas，she drove the car into a tree and killed my father．'
　　Inspector Walsh watched Diane's face carefully．'I see．So you wanted to kill your mother？'
　　Diane laughed．'I wanted to kill her，but I didn't．I can tell you a lot of things about this family，Inspector．Everyone wanted Mother to die．Uncle Albert wanted her money for his wife，Annie．And then my brother．He needs a lot of money．He has an expensive house and an expensive car．And think of Jackie．Do you know that Jackie didn't like Mother？A long time age，a nice boy worked here．He was the gardener．Jackie loved him very much，but Mother said no．A gardener was not a good husband for a Clarkson girl！'
　　Inspector Walsh listened quietly．All this was very interesting but was it important？Perhaps．What a happy family the Clarksons were！
　　'We found the empty bottle of sleeping tablets in your room，'Inspector Walsh said quietly． He watched her face carefully．
　　Diane stood up suddenly，her face angry．'What？I didn't put it there！I'm not going to listen to this！'She ran out of the room．
　　'Well，well，well，'Inspector Walsh said．'She likes you，Sergeant．You need to be careful．'
　　Sergeant Foster laughed but his face went red again．
　　'Someone put sleeping tablets in Molly's hot milk，'the In-spector said．'All the family were in the kitchen last night．Peter Hobbs and Tom Briggs were there，too．One of them killed Molly．'
　　Inspector Walsh got his hat and coat．'Come on．We need to talk to Peter Hobbs and Tom Briggs．Let's get some more coffee first．I'd like a sandwich，too．I'm hungry again！'




■ 5




■ 6 Chapter
　　They found Peter Hobbs under his car—an old green car．He got up slowly．He wore old blue trousers and a dirty orange shirt．
　　'We want to talk about Mrs Clarkson，'Inspector Walsh said．
　　'Oh，it's about her，'Peter said．He looked at the Inspec-tor．'I know she's dead．Someone in the village told me．'
　　'Why did you go to the Clarkson's house last night？'
　　'Jackie wanted me to come and see her brother，Roger．
　　“You're angry，”she said．“Come and tell Roger．”I went to the house but nobody opened the door．So I made a lot of noise and then they opened the door．Old Mrs Clarkson wasn't there．But I told Roger．I told them all！'Peter hit the car with his hand．'I wanted to kill that woman．I lost my job，my first job，because of her．Last month I was in trouble with the police and that old woman wrote to my office and she told them about the police．I wanted to kill her！'
　　'Take it easy！'Inspector Walsh said．'What happened next？'
　　'Jackie gave me some coffee，but her brother didn't listen to me，'Peter said angrily．'Then Tom Briggs came in．He wanted to talk to Roger，too．But Roger didn't listen to him．Jackie was very unhappy—she nearly cried．Then I went home．That's all．'
　　'I see．Now tell me about the tablets．You went to the village on Thursday？'
　　'Tablets？Oh，yes．I remember．Jackie wanted me to get her mother's tablets from the village．I go to the village on my bicycle—this car doesn't work．'
　　'Thank you，Peter．That's all．'
　　'That's all？'Peter laughed angrily．'You're going to come back，I know that！I know the police！'
　　Tom Briggs'farm was about half a mile away，near the river．It was not a big farm，and the house was old and dirty．
　　'Not much money here，'Inspector Walsh said．
　　Tom Briggs was a young man，about thirty years old，with dirty hands and bad teeth．'What's wrong？Excuse me，I'm eating my dinner，'he said．
　　'We can wait．Finish your dinner，'Inspector Walsh said．'We want to ask one or two questions about last night．'
　　'Come and wait in the front room，'Tom said and opened the door．
　　Inspector Walsh looked at the things in the front room．There was an old black and white television，and some books on the table．There was a picture of a happy young girl with long brown hair on the table，too．Inspector Walsh looked at the picture for a long time．Who was the girl？
　　Tom Briggs came back into the front room．
　　'Finished？'Inspector Walsh asked．'You know Mrs Clark－son is dead？'
　　Tom Briggs sat down suddenly on the nearest chair．'What？How did she die？When did it happen？I was there last night．'
　　'She died last night or early this morning．What did you do last night？'
　　'Me？Why are you asking me？I went there to meet Mr Clarkson Roger．I'm losing money on this farm and I need more land．I want half Mrs Clarkson's garden．'
　　'You went into the kitchen．What did you do next？Can you remember？'
　　Tom Briggs looked at Sergeant Foster and then back at Inspector Walsh．'I remember it very well．All the family were in the kitchen．Peter Hobbs was there，too．I talked to Roger．He wants his mother to sell the house．But he wants the land．He doesn't want me to have it．But now Mrs Clark-son is dead．What's going to happen now？'
　　Inspector Walsh got up and took the picture of the girl from the table．'Who's this？'
　　Tom's face went red．'Who？Oh！That's a friend．It's not…It was a long time ago．'
　　The two detectives walked back to the Clarksons' house through the garden．It was beautiful，green and quiet．Inspector Walsh felt tired and hungry．Who killed Molly？He knew the answer now，but he needed to ask one or two more questions．
　　'Let's go，Sergeant，'he said，and put on his hat again．'Tomorrow is a new day．'




■ 6




■ 7 Chapter
　　On Monday morning Sergeant Foster went to Roger's office and asked some questions．And then he went to Albert's house and asked some more questions．Inspector Walsh sat in his office and telephoned．He made phone calls about Peter Hobbs and he made phone calls about Tom Briggs．And then he had some coffee and sandwiches．
　　At three o'clock the two detectives drove to the Clarksons' house．
　　'I would like to see everyone，'he told Roger．
　　Everyone came into the sitting room and sat down．
　　Inspector Walsh stood in front of the windows and looked at them，one by one．'I want to talk to you Someone killed Molly Clarkson．Someone put sleeping tablets in her hot milk and killed her Nobody wanted to tell me the true story，but now I know the true story and I'm going to tell you．'
　　The two dogs came slowly into the room and sat down at Diane's feet．It was very quiet in the room．
　　The Inspector looked at Albert．'Mr King，your wife is very ill and needs a nurse．You told me this．You didn't tell me about your house．You're selling your house next month because you need the money．'
　　Albert was angry．'Last year I asked Molly's husband for some money，and he said yes．But then he died in an accident．'
　　'Accident！'Diane cried．'That was no accident．Mother killed Daddy because she wanted his money！
　　'Let's talk about you now，Diane，'said Inspector Walsh．You visited your mother every month and you took money from her．Last month she gave you money for your television．This month she gave you money for your telephone．Every month you told your mother：“It was no accident；you killed Daddy．I'm going to tell the police．”Your mother was afraid of the police and so she gave you the money．But in the end she wanted to stop you．She told Dr Pratt．No more money，she told Dr Pratt on Thursday；and on Saturday she died．You took the hot milk to your mother－what did she tell you？'
　　Diane began to cry．'I loved Daddy！He always gave money to me；he loved me．It was Mother－she didn't love Daddy and she didn't love me．Diane stopped．The dogs got up and went to the door．'It's true，I took a lot of money from Mother．On Saturday she told me—no more money．I wanted to kill her，but I didn't．'
　　The dogs came back and sat down again at Diane's feet．Inspector Walsh looked at Roger．'Mr Clarkson also needed money．'
　　Roger's face went red．'Don't tell them！Please！'
　　'Mr Clarkson lost his job last month．He has no money．But he has an expensive house and an expensive car．He likes expensive things．'
　　His sisters looked at him，but Roger put his hand over his eyes．'Don't talk to me！'
　　'It doesn't matter now！'Diane said．'Mother is dead and we have a lot of money．You don't need a job．'
　　Roger's face went red again．'Be quiet，Diane！'
　　'Now，Inspector Walsh began again．'Peter Hobbs is a very angry young man．Mrs Clarkson was not very nice to him．He got the sleeping tablets from the shop．But did he put the tablets in the hot milk？I think not．Tom Briggs wanted half the garden for his farm．He was in the kitchen that night．Did he put sleeping tablets in the hot milk？I think not．'
　　Suddenly it began to rain．For a minute everyone watched it through the window．Jackie took a cigarette from her bag and began to smoke．
　　'But someone wanted Peter Hobbs to come into the kitchen that night．She wanted everyone to see him，and listen to him，'Inspector Walsh said．
　　'She…？I don't understand，'Roger began，and stopped．
　　Inspector walsh moved away from the window and sat down．'I'm going to tell you the true story now．Miss Clark-son，you wanted Peter Hobbs to come to the house that night．He was very angry with your mother because of that letter．He said：“I want to kill her．”And you wanted everyone to hear that． Why？'
　　Jackie's face went white．It's not true！What about Diane？You found the empty bottle in her bag！'
　　Diane stood up．'In my bag？Jackie！What are you talking about？'
　　'Be quiet，please，and sit down，'Inspector Walsh said．He looked at Jackie．'It's true：we found the bottle in Diane's bag．But how do you know that？We didn't tell you．'
　　'You did…before…you told me before！'
　　'No．We found the empty bottle in Diane's room．We told you that．You talked about Diane's bag；we didn't tell you．Sergeant foster wrote it all down．'Inspector Walsh looked carefully at Jackie．'A long time ago，you knew Tom Briggs．He was the gardener here and you loved him．But your mother didn't like him．'
　　Jackie put her hands to her head．'No！No！'
　　'We found your picture-an old one-in Mr Briggs'house．You were younger then，and your hair was long．Last year Tom Briggs came back，and you wanted him．He loved you，too，but he had no money．He wanted the garden for his farm，he wanted money，he wanted you．But your mother said no．In the end，you wanted to kill your mother…and you did kill her．Your mother went downstairs to see the dogs and you put the sleeping tablets in her hot milk．Later，you put the empty bottle in Diane's bag．
　　Jackie stood up．Her eyes were dark and afraid．'You don't understand！she cried．'Mother gave me nothing…all those years．I wanted to be happy…to be with Tom．That's all．I love Tom，and he loves me．But Mother said no．Always no．'Then she began to cry．Nobody looked at her．
　　Jackie left the house in a police car．Inspector Walsh watched and then walked slowly to his car．He felt tired and hungry．He stopped and looked back at the house．
　　'Well，'he said to Sergeant Foster，'in the end，they go the money：Albert，Roger，Diane．They're all rich now．But are they going to be happy？'
　　He got into the car．'Let's go，'he said．'I'm hungry；need a sandwich．'




■ 7

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※


※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Mary Queen of Scots by Tim Vicary 





■ 1 Fotheringhay
　　My name is Bess Curle， but this is not my story． It is the story of my lady Mary， Queen of Scots．She wrote the story， and then she gave it to me． I am going to give it to her son．
　　She began the story a week ago． It was January 1587， and we sat here in our cold room in Fotheringhay Castle， in the north of England． We couldn't see much from the window．One or two houses， a river， some trees， some horses， and a road． That's all．
　　The road goes to London， the home of Queen Elizabeth of England． Mary sat with her little dog in her hands and watched it， all day long．
　　No one came along the road． Nothing happened． I watched Mary， unhappily．
　　‘Please， Your Majesty， come away from that window，'I said．‘ It doesn't help． No one is going to come． Queen Eliza－beth can't do it—Queens don't kill Queens．'
　　‘Don't they， Bess？'mary said．‘Then why are we here， in this prison？Why am I not free？'
　　‘Why， Your Majesty？Because Queen Elizabeth is afraid of you．'
　　‘That's right，'mary said．‘She's afraid of me， and she hates me too． She hates me because I am beautiful， and she is not； because I had three husbands， and she never married．And because many people—good Catnolic people in England，France，Scotland，Spain—say that I， Mary， am the true Queen of England， not Elizabeth．And Elizabeth has no chil－dren， so， when she is dead， my son James…'
　　She came away from the window and stood in front of me．‘James，'she said quietly，‘my son．Does he think about me sometimes？ He was only ten months old when I last saw him． It is nearly twenty years…'
　　‘Of course he thinks about you， Your Majesty，'I said． ‘You write to him often．How can he forget his mother？'
　　‘Then why doesn't he write to me？'mary asked．‘Does he want me to say here in an English prison？'
　　‘No， of course not， Your Majesty． But—he has a lot of work， Your Majesty．He is the King of Scotland， and…'
　　‘He is not the King of Scotland，Bess，'she said．‘Not be- fore I am dead．Remember that．'
　　‘No， Your Majesty， of course not． But perhaps people tell him things that are untrue． You know what people say． Per－haps—perhaps he thinks you killed his father．'
　　Mary's face went white．She was very angry， and for a minute I was afraid．She said：‘You know that's a lie， Bess．It is a lie！ I did not kill James's father—I knew nothing about it！'
　　‘I know that，Your Majesty．But perhaps James doesn't know it．He hears so many lies， all the time． He needs to know the true story．Why don't you write， and tell him？'
　　Mary sat down slowly． She looked old and tired．‘All right， Bess，'she said．‘Give me a pen， please． I'm going to write to James， and tell him the true story． You can give it to him when I'm dead．'
　　‘Dead， Your Majesty？ Don't say that． You aren't going to die．'
　　Her old， tired eyes looked at me．‘Yes I am， Bess． You know what is going to happen． One day soon， a man is going to bring a letter from Queen Elizabeth． And then her men are going to kill me． But before I die， I would like to write to my son James． I want to tell him the story of my life．So give me a pen， please．'
　　I gave her a pen． This is what she wrote：






■ 2 France
　　Dear James． Very soon I am going to die， and meet my God．Before I die， I want to write the true story of my life for you． Everything that I write here is true—I cannot lie to you， or to God． Please believe that， James． It's impor- tant to me．
　　My father died when I was one week old， so I was the Queen of Scots when I was a baby． At first I lived with my mother in Scotland， and then， when I was five， I went to France． My mother was French， but she stayed in Scotland， and died there．
　　I went to France to marry the King of France's son． His name was Francis， and he was one year younger than me． In 1559， his father died， so Francis was King． Then I was Queen of France， and Queen of Scotland too．
　　I was very happy in France． Francis， my husband， was like a little brother to me． I think he loved me， bur he was very young，and he was often ill．And then，in 1560，he died．He was sixteen years old．
　　When he died I was very unhappy， and my life was very different． There was a new King and Queen， and I wasn't important in France， any more． But I was still Queen of Scots， so I came back to Scotland． When I arrived in Scotland， I was a young girl of eighteen． My mother was dead， and there was no one there to meet me． I walked off the ship，and I slept in a little house near the sea．
　　Next day， the Scots lords came from Edinburgh． They were pleased to see me， and for a week everyone was happy． People smiled at me and sang in the streets． I think everyone liked me． Then， that Sunday， I went to church．
　　James， my son， you are a Protestant and I am a Catholic．You are a good man， and you love God， but your church and my church are enemies． I was born a Catholic， and I am going to die a Catholic． I love God， too—I hope you understand that． I'm not going to change now．
　　That Sunday， people shouted angrily in the streets．‘Your Majesty，'said the Scots lords．‘Scotland is a Protestant coun-try． You can't go to a Catholic church here． The Scottish people don't like Catholics．'
　　‘I'm sorry， my lords，'I said．‘But I am your Queen—no one tells me what to do．I don't hate Protestants，and I'm not going to kill them． The people can go to their Protestant churches， and pray to God there． But I'm going to pray with Catholics， in my church．'
　　People were angry because of that． A man called John Knox came to see me． He was a famous Protestant churchman， but I didn't like him． He was a big， angry man with black clothes．He hated the Catholic church， and wanted all Catholics to leave Scotland． To him， the Protestant church was the only true church of God． He said：‘Your Majesty， you're a young woman， like my daughter． Women can't understand difficult 10things like God or the church． Find a good Protestant husband，girl． Let him rule this country for you．'
　　I was very angry with this man Knox． I was a Queen， but I was only eighteen． He didn't talk quietly—he shouted at me．I cried because of his angry words． I could not understand him—he talked so much， and he knew so many books． But I did not go to his church．
　　He was right about one thing． Perhaps I could rule Scotland without a man， but I could not have a child without one． And every Queen needs a son or daughter to come after her．So I began to look for a husband．






■ 3 Darnley and Riccio
　　At first I wanted to marry the son of the King of Spain，Don Carlos． But he was a Catholic， of course， and my Scots lords did not like that． It was difficult for me， James． I wanted to please myself． I wanted to please my friends and family in France and to please my people， too． And then there was the Queen of England．
　　At first I wanted very much to be friends with Elizabeth．We wrote many letters， and talked about a meeting—a meet-ing between two sister Queens．Elizabeth wrote to me at this time．
　　Our two countries need to be friends．You need a husband，I need a friend．Why not marry my friend Robert Dudley，the Earl of Leicester？He is a tall，strong man． I think he could be a good husband for you．
　　I was very angry about this letter．There were a lot of sto－ries about Elizabeth and Robert Dudley．They were good friends—he often danced and sang and talked with her． Some－times，people said， he stayed in her room all night． Dudley had a wife， but one day she died very suddenly． It was an ac-cident—she fell down the stairs， they say． But then， perhaps she was unhappy， because of her husband and Elizabeth．
　　‘And she writes to me about a man like this！'I thought．‘She wants him to marry me， because he is her friend—her lover，perhaps！She wants her lover to be King of Scotland！'
　　I found a better man than Dudley， James． I found Henry Darnley， your father．
　　He was nineteen years old， and I was twenty－three．He was a tall man， with a beautiful face and big green eyes． He talked and sang well， and I liked dancing with him． He often wore expensive black clothes， and he laughed a lot when he was with me． He was very young and friendly， and I felt happy when I was with him． I liked him very much， and I thought he loved me too．
　　He was an important man， too．We were cousins—his grandfather was King of Scots， and his great-grandfather was Henry VII of England．
　　In July 1565， I married him． Elizabeth was very angry， and so were a lot of the Scots lords． My half－brother， the Earl of Moray， tried to stop the marriage． I had to fight him， and he ran south， to England．But I was happy．Your father and I laughed， every day． He was now Henry， King of Scots．
　　After one or two weeks， the laughter stopped． A King has a lot of work， James， you know that． He has to read hundreds of letters， talk to people， and think about a lot of important things．I did those things，every day．But now，I thought，I had a man to help me．
　　‘My lord Henry，'I said．‘Would you like to read all the letters with me？ You can sit next to me， and you can work with me every day．'
　　Your father looked unhappy．‘I'm not interested in work like that，'he said．‘I don't understand it．'
　　‘Of course not，'I said．‘You're a young man， my love．But I can teach you．'
　　For one or two days he sat down with me， and I tried to teach him． But it was true， he was not interested in the work，and he did not try to understand it．
　　‘You do it， Mary，'he said．‘I'm going out with my friends． We're going to ride， and drink， and swim．'
　　So I did all the work． At night， too， he often went out with his friends in the town． They drank a lot， and laughed and sang， and there were often fights． But no one said anything，because he was the King， my husband． What could people say？ They were unhappy， but they were afraid of him． Some of them went to England， to the Earl of Moray．
　　At this time I was often very tired， because I was pregnant．You， my son James， were alive inside me． But I did all the work of a Queen and I needed friends too．One of these friends was a young Italian， David Riccio．
　　Riccio was a little man and he was not tall or beautiful or strong． But he was a very clever， interesting man． He wrote many of my letters for me， and helped me． He sang well， too，and I sometimes sang with him in the evenings． I liked him very much，and at first，your father liked him too．
　　But then， Moray's friends began to talk about me and Ric－cio．‘David Riccio is in the Queen's rooms every night，'they said to your father．‘She laughs and sings and dances with him， my lord—it is not right！ He is not a Scotsman， and he is not her husband． He is always with her．'
　　Perhaps they said other things，too—I don't know．A lot of Scots lords listened to them． But I tell you， James， before God， I did nothing wrong． David Riccio was a good man． He worked hard， and he helped me—so of course I liked him．Your father did not work—he went out to the town every night with his friends，and drank．
　　And then one night， your father came home．






■ 4 The death of David Riccio
　　It was a Saturday evening in March 1566． I was in Edin－burgh with some friends． David Riccio was there， with six or seven other people． We were in a small room， but there was a good dinner on the table， and we were happy． It was dark outside， but inside it was warm and friendly．
　　Suddenly， a door opened behind me． In the door was Henry Darnley，my husband．I stood up and smiled．
　　‘Good evening， my lord，'I said．‘Please come in． Would you like something to eat？'
　　‘No， thank you，'he said．‘I'm not hungry．But I want to sit next to you， wife． Please tell that man to move．'
　　A man got out of the chair next to me and Darnley sat beside me．Then he put his arms round me． I did not like it． His face was hot， and his eyes looked unhappy． But I smiled and said，‘I'm happy to see you， my lord．'
　　‘Are you， Mary？'He laughed．‘Are you really？'
　　‘Yes， of course， my lord． But—'
　　Then the second door opened and his friend， Lord Ruthven，stood there．He had a knife in his hand． His face was red， and he looked very angry．
　　Af first no one moved． Then Ruthven said，‘Your Majesty，send David Riccio out of this room， now！ I want him！'
　　I looked at Riccio． He was afraid．‘Why？'I said．‘Why do you want him？'
　　‘He is a bad， wicked man！'Ruthven said．‘Send him out！'
　　‘No！'I said．‘You want to kill him． David Riccio is my friend！ He stays here， with me！'
　　‘He goes out， woman！'Lord Ruthven said．‘ King Henry，hold your wife， please！'
　　I stood up， but Darnley held my arms and I could not move．David Riccio ran behind me and held my dress． My friends in the room stood up too， and moved towards Ruthven angrily．But he had a knife in his hand．
　　‘Get back！'he said angrily．‘Don't touch me！'
　　Then five men with knives ran into the little room， and there was a fight． One man held a knife in my face， and an－other man hit David Riccio， behind me． Then they pulled him out of the room．
　　‘Help me！'he screamed．‘Help me， my Queen—please！They're going to kill me！Don't—aaaaaargh！'
　　I couldn't help him， because Darnley had me in his arms．But I could hear David Riccio's screams． I think he fell down the stairs， and he screamed for two or three minutes． Then it was quiet．
　　‘What are you doing？'I asked Darnley angrily．‘Riccio is a good man—why are you doing this？'
　　Darnley laughed．‘You are my wife， Mary—not David Ric－cio's！'he said．‘so why are you with him every evening？You never talk to me！'
　　‘I don't talk to you because you are never here！'I said．‘You are always drinking with your friends！ You aren't a king， you're a stupid boy！'
　　He laughed again． It was not a nice laugh．‘Well，'he said．‘Perhaps I am a boy， but that is better than David Riccio，now．Do you want to go and see him？'
　　I did see him， five minutes after that． He was very dead，and there was blood all over the floor． Poor David Riccio． He sings to God now， not me．
　　I looked at Henry Darnley， my husband． He had a stupid smile on his face． But I think he was afraid of me．I looked at him a long time， and the smile went away．
　　‘Remember this night，husband，'I said to him．‘Remem－ber it well．Think about it when you look into my eyes， and before you go to sleep． David Riccio was my friend， and you killed him in front of me． I'm never going to forget that，Henry Darnley． Never！'






■ 5 My son is born
　　Next morning， Darnley came to see me． He was afraid．‘What's the matter，husband？'I said．‘Why are you crying？'
　　‘Oh Mary， Mary！'he said． ‘I'm sorry！ I was wrong！I helped those men to kill Riccio， and now the Earl of Moray is back here with them！He hates me！I am afraid they're going to kill me， and you too． Think of our child， Mary， here inside you！'
　　He took me in his arms again．I was very angry． I am sorry， James， that this man was your father． He was a stupid boy， not a man． He was tall and strong and beautiful but he could never think like a man or a king．
　　I said，‘ You know these men， Henry． What do they want？'
　　‘They—they want our child， Mary． They don't want us．They're going to put you in prison． They don't want you to be Queen—they want your child to be King or Queen． I—I don't know what they want to do with me．'
　　‘Perhaps they want you to be King， too， without me，'I said quietly．‘Then you can do what they say， like a little boy．'
　　‘Perhaps，Mary．They said that，yesterday．But now that Moray's here—I don't know． I'm afraid． Please help me！'He began to cry again．‘What can we do？'
　　‘We can run away，'I said．‘We can leave Edinburgh quick－ly and quietly， before Ruthven and his men stop us． Be quiet for a minute． I want to think．'
　　I walked up and down for two or three minutes， then I said：‘Henry， go back to these men． Tell them—'
　　‘No！ Mary， please！ I can't！ I'm afraid of them！'
　　‘Listen to me，Henry！And try to be a man． Go and tell them I'm ill， because of the child．Say I'm not angry with them． Tell them anything—lie to them． Then， tonight， bring some men and horses here， behind the castle…'
　　He went， and did it．All day I waited in my rooms， and lis－tened． Then， at one o'clock in the morning， Darnley and I went quietly down the stairs behind the castle．Some of my friends were there， with horses for us． Quickly， we rode away into the night．
　　That was a very bad night． It was dark and cold． I was ill，and Darnley was afraid．‘Come on！'he said．‘Ride faster，woman！ You're too slow！'
　　But I was pregnant， and it was cold and dark． We rode for five bours in the rain．‘I can't， Henry！'I said．‘I'm ill．Think of the baby！ I don't want it to die！'
　　‘Why not？'he said．‘ We can always make another one！'
　　I'm sorry， but it is true． Your father said things like that，James．Then he rode away in front of me， into the dark． I rode slowly behind， with my good woman， Bess Curle．
　　In the morning we arrived at Dunbar Castle． Darnley slept，and I wrote letters to my friends． Next day Lord Bothwell came to help me． I liked him—he was a good， strong man．Soon I had an army of 8，000 men． Bothwell and I rode back to Edinburgh with the army． Lord Ruthven died， and some of his friends ran away． But the Earl of Moray stayed．
　　All that summer I ruled the country， and waited for the ba-by． My husband stayed outside my rooms． I did not want to see him． No one did． Perhaps he drank with his friends． I don't know．
　　And then， on 19th June， in a small room in Edinburgh Cas－tle， my baby was born． It took a long time， but at last you were in my arms， James， my son．
　　I asked your father to come in．‘My Lord Henry，'I said．‘This is our baby！ Look at him， my Lord． Take him in your arms． He is your son—isn't he beautiful？'
　　But your father did not love me， James． Very often， after you were born， he slept with other women． I know that be－cause he talked to everyone about it． I think he wanted people to know． And I am sorry， but I do not think he loved you，James． When I took you to church and gave you your name，he did not come． He wasn't interested．
　　But because of him， David Riccio was dead． I could never forget that．Never．






■ 6 Kirk O'Field
　　I had a new man to help me now．The Earl of Bothwell—a strong，clever man． He was older than me；he was not a boy like Darnley． He worked hard and he could think． He was a good fighter and he was not afraid of other men． Per－haps you are like him， James， my son？
　　In January your father，Darnley，was ill in Glasgow．I went to see him， and took him back to Edinburgh． He was unhappy， and afraid of people． He saw enemies behind every door． Poor stupid boy！ He said he loved me again． I was an－gry， but I felt sorry for him， too． He was very ill．
　　‘It's not far now， Henry，'I said．‘You can sleep in the castle．'
　　‘No， not there， please， Mary！'he said．‘I don't want to go into the castle． I'm afraid of it！'
　　‘But where do you want to go？'I asked．
　　‘Find me a little house outside the town， and stay with me there，'he said．‘We can be happy there．'
　　So I found him a small house called Kirk o'Field，outside Edinburgh． He stayed there， in a room upstairs， and some－times I slept in a room downstairs． Darnley was often afraid，and I visited him every day． Slowly， he got better．
　　On Sunday，9th February， there was a big wedding in Ed－inburgh． After the wedding， Bothwell and I walked out to Kirk o'Field to see Darnley and talk to him． Everyone sang，and laughed， and was very happy．
　　At ten o'clock I was tired．‘Good night， my lords，'I said．
　　‘I'm going downstairs to bed．'
　　Lord Bothwell put his hand on my arm．‘Your Majesty，'he said．‘You can't sleep here now．Don't you remember？Peo－ple are dancing and singing in town tonight—everyone wants you to go．'
　　‘Oh， yes． I forgot，'I said．‘Of course， people want to see me there． So， good night， Henry． Sleep well．'
　　Darnley was very unhappy．‘Please， Mary my love， don't go！'he said．‘Don't leave me here！'
　　But I did not love him now． I remembered the night when Riccio died．So I smiled and said，‘Good night，Henry．Be a man now．don't be afraid of the dark．'
　　Then I went downstairs with Lord Bothwell． Outside the house， we met one of Bothwell's men． He looked afraid， and there was something black on his face and hands．
　　‘Jesus， man， how dirty you are！'I said．‘Don't come near me with those hands．'
　　‘No， my lady， of course not，'he said． He looked at Both－well for a minute， and then ran away quickly． I laughed， got on my horse， and forgot about it．
　　I tell you before God， James， I did not kill your father．It was not me． I knew nothing about it—nothing！
　　I sang and danced in town， and then went to bed in Edin－burgh Castle． Then， at two o'clock in the morning， there was a sudden noise—a very big BANG！ Everybody heard it all through the town．
　　‘My God！'I said．‘What's that？'
　　Everyone ran out of their rooms．Lord Bothwell was down－stairs．‘Don't be afraid， ladies，'he said．‘My men are out－side—they're going to see what it is．'
　　After an hour he came to see me．‘Please sit down， my lady，'he said．‘I have some unhappy news．'
　　‘Yes，my lord．What is it？'
　　‘It's your husband， Lord Darnley． He is dead．'
　　‘But—how？ How did he die？ Who killed him？'
　　‘I don't know， my lady．That bang—that was his house，Kirk o'Field． It's not there any more．'
　　‘What？ And Darnley was inside？'
　　‘Well， no， my lady，'Bothwell said slowly．‘My men found him in the garden， not in the house． He is wearing only night clothes， and there is no blood on him． But he is dead． I am sorry．'
　　‘Take me out there！ I want to see him—now！'
　　‘Yes， my lady．'
　　I went out to Kirk o'Field in the early morning． There was no house now—no walls， no doors， no windows—nothing．And there in the garden， a long way from the house， was that poor dead boy， my husband．
　　I did not love him but I cried then． He was your father，James， and I did not kill him． I don't know who killed him，but he had many enemies in Scotland．
　　I was very afraid．I， too， had enemies， and I often slept there． Perhaps someone wanted to kill me， too．






■ 7 Bothwell
　　Soon everyone in Europe heard the news． The Queen of France and the Queen of England wrote angry letters to me． Who killed the King？ they asked． I was very unhappy at this time， James． We looked for the killers， but we could not find them． Please believe me， James． The Scots lords are difficult men． Some were friends， some were enemies， but they changed all the time．
　　Many people in Scotland said：‘Bothwell killed Lord Darn－ley．'I heard them， outside the castle， and in the town． But I never believed it． People in Edinburgh sold horrible stories and pictures of Bothwell the same day that Darnley died． It was too soon． Perhaps Darnley's killers wrote these stories about Bothwell， before they killed Darnley．
　　I don't think Lord Bothwell killed your father，James． He was a good friend to me in difficult times． He was a good strong， clever man， and he worked hard． I liked that． A lot of women liked him，I think．
　　Three times that spring， he asked me to marry him． He had a wife， and I could not marry again， so soon． I asked him to wait．
　　Then， on24th April， I rode out of Edinburgh to the north．I had five or six friends with me．Six miles outside the town，Lord Bothwell met us， with an army．
　　‘Why are you here，my lord？'I said．
　　He smiled．‘ Because I want to meet you， Mary，'he said．‘I want you to come with me to my castle．'He rode next to me， and his men rode between me and my friends．
　　I was afraid，and a little excited，too．‘But，my lord，you can't do this！'I said．‘I don't want to come with you now．'
　　‘But I want you， Mary，'he said．‘Your friends can't stop me． I love you， and I want to marry you． What's wrong with that？'
　　I said nothing．What could I say？I liked him，and he had an army． I had only six friends．So I rode with him to his cas－tle in Dunbar， and stayed there two weeks． And then… He was a strong man， and I was only a woman． And I did like him， James． I liked him very much．
　　After two weeks in Dunbar， Bothwell and I rode back to Edinburgh． His wife did not want him， and was happy to di－vorce him．So，on 15th May 1567， I married him．
　　He was a good man， James． A much better man than your father． I needed a strong man to help me rule the country．
　　But I was wrong． I understand that now． All the Scots lords were afraid of Bothwell， and many of them were his ene-mies． They had an army， and on 15th June，Bothwell and I rode out to fight them．
　　We met them at Carberry Hill． It was a hot day， and the two big armies stood， and looked， and waited． Their army had a big flag with a picture of your poor dead father，Darnley， on it． Under the picture， there were the words ‘Find my killers， oh God．'
　　‘Come on， my lord，'I said to Bothwell．‘Our army is bet－ter than theirs—let's fight them！'
　　Both well rode up and down， and talked to his men． But they didn't want to fight． They talked， and looked at the flag， and waited． Then some of them walked home．
　　At five o'clock that evening Lord Kirkcaldy rode from his army to talk to us． He said to me，‘My lady， leave your hus-band， and come with us．We don't want men to die．'
　　And so， because our men didn't want to fight， I went with him． It was a very bad day for me． They took me back to Ed－inburgh， and people in the streets screamed at me：‘Kill the woman！ She sleeps with her husband's killer！We want James to be King！ Kill her now！'
　　I was unhappy， and afraid， and I was pregnant again．They took me to Lochleven Castle， and put me in a room like a prison．There， I did not eat for two weeks， and Bothwell's children—there were two babies—wer born dead．I nearly died too—I was so angry and tired and ill． Then， one day after the babies died， Lord Lindsay gave me a letter． It said：
　　I，Mary， Queen of Scots， give the kingdom of Scotland to my son， James．From today， James is the new King of Scots．But because he is a child， the Earl of Moray， my half—brother， can rule the country for him．
　　Because I was afraid， and tired， and ill， I wrote my name on the letter：Mary． But it is not important，James，it doesn't change anything．I am Queen of Scots， not you． That letter changes nothing．
　　Bothwell went over the sea， and died in a prison in Denmark． I was a prisoner in Lochleven for a year． A lot of people in Europe were angry about that． Queen Elizabeth wrote to the Earl of Moray．‘You cannot keep a Queen in prison，'she said．‘It is very wrong！'I was pleased about that．But Moray didn't listen．
　　Lord Douglas lived in the castle， and his young son，William，liked me． One day， there was a wedding in the castle． People sang and danced and drank． William Douglas gave me some old women's clothes． I put the clothes on， and walked quietly out of the castle with him． He shut the castle door behind us， to keep his father's friends in． Then we got on some horses， and rode away through the night．
　　All my friends came back to me． Soon I had a big army．‘Mary is our Queen again！'people said．‘Give her back her son！'You were in Earl Moray's castle， James， so I came to fight him． I rode with my army to Langside， near Glasgow．And there…
　　There， James…
　　There， my son， I lost the fight． I am so sorry． I had many good， strong men in my army， but Earl Moray's men were stronger． Many of my men died， and some ran away． After the fight， I ran away too．
　　I did not want to go to prison again． So I rode south， to England．‘Queen Elizabeth wants to help me，'I thought．‘She understands．She wrote to Moray and she is a Queen，like me．I can come back to Scotland with her army， kill Moray， and find my baby son James．I am in England but I am free．I can try again．'
　　I was wrong about that， too． Very wrong．






■ 8 England
　　Elizabeth didn't give me her army．She put me in prison．You know this，James—it is the story of your life，not mine． I was twenty－five years old when I came to England， and I am forty－five now．Twenty years in English prisons．
　　Moray told lies about me． Mary and Bothwell killed Darn－ley， he said．Mary slept with Riccio and Bothwell and killed her husband． But it's not true！They're all lies， James— wicked lies！They only said these things because I am a woman， and a Catholic， and they don't want a Catholic queen in Scotland， they want a Protestant king．
　　A king like you， James．Why， James my son， don't you help me？ Why are you friendly with Elizabeth， my enemy？You don't want me back in Scotland， do you？ You believe these lies， don't you？You talk to Moray and his friends， every day．But they lied about me，James．Moray and his friends killed Riccio Then killed your father， too．They stole my husband Bothwell， stole my son…
　　Stole my son's love…
　　I am sorry， James．Forgive me．Sometimes I get very angry．It is difficult not to be angry， when you are in prison for twenty years．
　　Elizabeth didn't know what to do．Sometimes she believed Moray， sometimes she didn't．She was afraid to kill me， be-cause I was a Queen． She was afraid to let me go free， bcause I have friends in England． The English Catholics want me to be Queen of England， not her． And she is a woman with no husband and no son， so she hates me， too．
　　Sometimes the English Catholics write to me and ask me for help， and sometimes I write to them．Sometimes Elizabeth's men find these letters． The English Protestants want to kill me because of these letters．‘You are a wicked woman！'they say：‘ You killed your husband， Darnley， and now you want to kill our Queen Elizabeth．You're going to die！'
　　‘I did not kill my husband，'I said．‘And when l came to England， I did not want to kill your Queen． I asked her for help—I wanted to go back to Scotand！But，my lords，she put me in prison for twenty years！ Twenty years， my lords！I want to be free—don't you understand that？ when men write to me and try to help me， then yes， sometimes I write back！Why not？ Is that wicked， do you think？'
　　They didn't listen． Of course not． They want to kill me．And so they wrote to Queen Elizabeth． And now I sit here， in Fotheringhay Castle， and wait for her to answer． I do not want to die， James my son， but I do not want to live all my life in an English prison． I am old， and tired of life． Think well of me， James， my son， and…






■ 9 A death
　　Queen Mary stopped writing then． Yesterday afternoon，7th February 1587， we heard a horse outside our win-dow． Mary looked out． There was a man there， on the road from London． He had a letter from the Queen of England．
　　In the evening， an Englishman， Lord Shrewsbury，came to see Mary，‘I am sorry，my lady，'he said．‘But I have a letter from my Queen． You're going to die， tomorrow．'
　　Mary did not move．‘When？'she asked quietly．
　　‘At half past eight in the morning，'he said．‘I am very sorry， my lady．'He went away．
　　We did not sleep much that night．We talked and prayed to God， and she gave me her letter to her son， James．‘Give it to him， Bess， please，'she said．‘And tell him how I died．'
　　‘Yes， my lady，'I said． And so now I am going to tell you．King James．This is how your mother died．
　　At six o'clock she got up，prayed， and dressed． She put on a red petticoat first， then a black dress， and a white veil over the dress． The veil came from her head to her feet； she could see out through it， but we could not see her face． She looked like a woman on her wedding day．
　　When the Englishmen came we went downstairs with her．Her little dog walked beside her， under the veil， but the Eng－lishmen didn't see that． Six of us went into a big room with her． A hundred people stood and watched．
　　A Protestant churchman came to talk to her，‘My lady，'he said．‘Pray with me—'
　　‘No，'she said．‘Thank you， but no． I was born a Catholic and I'm going to die a Catholic． I think God understands that．'she prayed for five minutes， and then stood up． The executioner came towards her． He was a big， strong man with an axe， and something black over his face．
　　‘I am sorry， my lady，'he said．‘I don't hate you， but this is my work． Please forgive me．'
　　‘Of course I forgive you，'mary said．‘I am old， and tired，and you're going to open my prison doors for me． I am going to see God．Do your work well．'
　　Then she looked at me and her friends．‘Don't cry for me，ladies，'she said．‘Please， don't cry now．'
　　She could not walk to the block， so the executioner helped her． He took off her white veil， and then he took off her black dress， and put it on the floor． She stood there， in her red pet-ticoat，with a smile on her face． Then the executioner put something over her eyes． Very slowly， Mary put her head on the block．
　　‘The Lord my God is my one true friend，'she said．‘I give my life，oh God，into your hands．'
　　Then the executioner lifted his axe， once… twice… oh God！three times…and her head—her poor，poor head，fell on the floor．
　　It was very quiet in the room after that． It is a little thing，a head—a very little thing． But there was so much blood—blood on her red petticoat， blood on her black dress and her white veil， blood on the executioner's shoes， blood all over the floor． Blood， blood everywhere．
　　We all looked， and said nothing． The executioner put down his axe and stood quietly． And then Mary's little dog came out from under her bloody dress and veil， and walked slowly， un-happily， through the blood towards her head．
　　My lord，the story of your poor mother's life finishes here．We， her friends， cry for her， but that is how your mother died． She died like a Queen． A good lady and a famous Queen．
　　Mary， Queen of Scots．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Under the Moon by Romena Akinyemi





■ 1 AOL
　　Five hundred kilometres over Europe，Ship OM-45 moved north．In a room at the back of the ship，Kiah watched the numbers on the computer in front of him．
　　‘Time for dinner，’Rilla said．
　　The numbers changed quickly and Kiah's eyes didn't move．Rilla went across the room to his table．She began to watch the numbers，too．
　　‘What's wrong with the satellite？’she asked．She was a beautiful girl，about twenty years old，with long black hair and big eyes．
　　‘Nothing's wrong with the satellite，’Kiah answered quietly．‘It's the AOL．’He began to write the numbers in the book on his table．
　　Suddenly，the numbers stopped changing．Kiah looked at Rilla．‘Over Europe，’he said．‘It's happening．The AOL is breaking up．There are big holes in the AOL and they're getting bigger．’
　　‘You're right！Shall we see Captain Seru now，before dinner？’
　　Kiah stood up．He was nearly two metres tall，with dark eyes and hair．‘Yes，come on，’he said．
　　Quickly，they went to Captain Seru's room．They waited at the door．
　　‘Come in！’captain Seru called．She was a little woman with a fat face．‘Come in！Would you like a drink？’
　　‘No，thank you，’Kiah answered．‘I'd like you to look at these numbers．’Kiah gave Captain Seru his book．
　　Captain Seru looked at the numbers．Suddenly，her face changed．‘No，no， ’she said．‘I don't want to talk．It's late and I'm tired．Sit down and have a drink．’
　　Kiah and Rilla sat down．There was a big window in Captain Seru's room．Kiah looked out of the window at the dark sky．He saw the Moon．It was cold and white in the dark sky．
　　‘Captain Seru，’he began．‘It's important．Look at those numbers carefully．The AOL is beginning to—’
　　‘Stop！’captain Seru stood up and put her hands in her pockets．She went to the window and looked at the sky．
　　‘Three hundred years ago，Earth nearly died，’Rilla said．‘Earth stopped dying because of the AOL．But now，over Europe，the AOL is breaking up．We would like you to talk to Earth Commander．’
　　Captain Seru did not move．‘Do you remember Adai？’she asked．She didn't wait for an answer．‘I was on his ship，two years ago．One evening，the satellite gave us interesting numbers about the AOL．We went back to Earth and saw Earth Commander．’captain Seru stopped speaking．
　　Rilla looked at Kiah．‘And then？’she asked Captain Seru．
　　‘Gog was angry，very angry，’captain Seru said．‘In the end，he sent Adai to the Moon． Adai's there now，Commander of the Moon colony，under the Moon．’
　　Kiah waited for a second or two．‘I know about Adai． But we need to talk to Earth Commander again．These numbers are worse．’
　　Captain Seru's face went red．‘You don't understand．I'm not going to talk to Gog．Last time，he sent me to a weather ship in the Antarctic！This is my first Ship for two years！’And Captain Seru began drinking．
　　Kiah stood up．‘Thank you，Captain Seru．’
　　Captain Seru said nothing．
　　Kiah and Rilla left the room，and walked slowly downstairs．The Ship was dark and quiet．It was eight o'clock and every-body was at dinner．
　　‘What are we going to do next？’Rilla asked．
　　‘I need to talk to Adai，’Kiah said．
　　‘OK，talk to Adai．But he's far away on the Moon colony，’Rilla said．‘Let's visit Commander Zadak．’
　　‘Zadak？Commander of Australia？ He's famous！’
　　‘Yes．He's my father's friend．He worked with my father in Brazil ten years ago．Perhaps he can help us．’
　　Kiah smiled．‘Good！We return to Earth next week．I can phone Adai from Kisangani and then we can go to Australia． But now，I'm hungry！Let's get some dinner．’






■ 2 Visit to Australia
　　On Friday，after three weeks in space，Kiah and Rilla finished work and left Ship OM-45 on a space plane to Kisangani．Kiah phoned Adai and Rilla phoned Commander Zadak in Australia．The next morning they took an aeroplane to Sydney．A taxi took them from the airport to Commander Zadak's office，some kilometres north of Sydney．
　　‘Wait for us here，’Kiah said to the taxi driver．
　　Kiah and Rilla walked to the gate．About ten guards stood in front of the gate．Across the road，a train waited．
　　‘Rilla，OM-45，’Rilla said．‘To see Commander Zadak at four-thirty．’
　　‘Let me call the Commander's office，’the guard said．
　　Kiah and Rilla waited．It was hot and Kiah began to feel thirsty．
　　The guard came back．‘I'm sorry，’he said．‘The Com-mander can't see you．’
　　‘But I talked to the Commander yesterday，’Rilla said．
　　‘He wanted to see us at four-thirty．’
　　‘The Commander is leaving on the train in three minutes，’the guard said．
　　‘Can we wait and see him here？’Kiah asked．
　　‘No！'the guard shouted．‘Get out of here！’
　　Kiah and Rilla walked back to the taxi．
　　‘Where's the driver？’Kiah asked．
　　‘Look！He's sitting under that tree，’Rilla said．
　　Just then，Commander Zadak came out of the gate．He was a very tall，big man with blue eyes and a lot of white hair．Two guards marched in front of him，and two guards marched be-hind him．They all carried guns．
　　‘There he is！’Rilla cried．‘Commander！’And she began to run along the road to him．
　　‘Commander Zadak did not stop．A guard opened the door of the train and the Commander got in．Slowly，the train began to move．’
　　Kiah ran to the taxi and jumped in．Then he drove the taxi fast down the road．The taxi driver saw him and ran after him．The train began to move faster．Suddenly，Kiah drove the taxi off the road．He drove in front of the train and stopped．
　　The train came nearer．And then the train stopped， very near the taxi，and some guards jumped off．Kiah opened the door and got out of the taxi．
　　‘Put up your hands！'the guards shouted．
　　Two of the guards began to hit Kiah．
　　‘Stop that！’someone shouted．‘Bring him over here！’It was Commander Zadak．
　　Kiah stood in front of the Commander．Just then，Rilla ar-rived．
　　‘Oh，it's you！’commander Zadak said．He did not smile．‘Rilla，your father's going to be angry．’
　　‘We want to talk to you，Commander，’Rilla said．‘It's very important．’
　　‘Very well．I'm listening．’
　　Kiah began to talk．‘Two years ago，Adai told you about the holes in the AOL．Now they're worse．The AOL is break-ing up over Europe．Please look at these numbers and this satellite picture．’
　　He gave his book to Commander Zadak and the Commander looked at the numbers．
　　‘It's important，Commander，’Kiah said．‘In ten years Earth is going to die．’
　　‘You stopped my train because of this？’commander Zadak asked．‘Two years ago Adai talked to me about the AOL．Then he talked to Earth Commander，and what happened？Where is Adai now？Is the Moon colony helping the AOL？’
　　‘We know about Adai，Commander，’Rilla said．‘But someone needs to talk to Earth Commander again．’
　　‘I'm going to talk to Gog about rain，I can tell you that．Earth needs rain：there was no rain last winter．Half of Australia has no water and my trees here are dying．Without rain，many people are going to die．Is Gog going to understand that？I don't know！’
　　Commander Zadak began to walk back to his train．‘Move that taxi！’he called to his guards．
　　Some guards moved the taxi back to the road and then they jumped on to the train again．The train began to move．
　　‘OK，’the taxi driver shouted．‘What are you going to do next？Drive my taxi into the river？’
　　Kiah smiled．He took some money from his pocket and gave it to the taxi driver．
　　The taxi driver looked at the money．‘OK，OK，’he said．‘Where now？Back to the airport？’
　　Kiah took Rilla's hand，‘Yes，’he said．‘Let's get back to Kisangani．We can phone Adai again tomorrow．’






■ 3 Earth Commander
　　The next day in Kisangani，Kiah and Rilla waited quietly in an office in Gog's house．Suddenly， Commander Zadak came into the office and gave some letters to the man behind the table．He saw the two young people and stopped in front of them．
　　‘You again！’he said．‘What are you doing here？’
　　Kiah stood up．‘Good morning，Commander．We're here because we want to see Earth Commander．’
　　‘I saw Earth Commander some minutes ago and talked to him about rain，’Zadak said quietly．‘But he didn't listen．Your captain，Seru，was here earlier this morning and began to tell him about the holes in the AOL．But Gog doesn't want to hear about our planet．He's always talking about Mars．In the end，he's going to destroy Earth．’
　　‘Please help us！’Rilla cried．‘Come and see Gog with us！’
　　‘No．’Zadak looked at Kiah and then at Rilla with his blue eyes．‘I'm not talking to Gog again．And you—Gog isn't going to listen to you．Be careful—and good luck！’
　　Commander Zadak opened the door and left the office．
　　Rilla looked at Kiah．‘Earth Commander is a difficult man．I don't understand him．’
　　‘Everyone is afraid of him，’Kiah said．‘And Commander Zadak isn't going to help us．’
　　Kiah and Rilla waited．They waited and waited．At nearly twelve o'clock，a guard came into the office．
　　‘Come！’he said．
　　Kiah and Rilla went with the guard．The house was big and old，with big windows and many doors．The guard went downstairs and opened one of the doors．There was nobody in the room．
　　‘Wait here，'the guard said，and left．
　　Kiah and Rilla sat down on the expensive green and black chairs and looked at the expensive flowers on the tables．There were no windows in this room．Suddenly，the door opened and a tall，fat woman came in．Her name was Bel，and she was Gog's wife．She had a lot of long red hair and she wore an expensive blue dress．Bel liked expensive things．She carried a cat．The cat was black and white：half its face was black and half was white；half its body was black and half was white．
　　‘Why are you here？ Why do you want to see Earth Commander？’she asked．
　　Rilla stood up．‘How do you do？’she said．‘We want to talk to Earth Commander about the AOL．We have new numhers from the satellite．’
　　Bel's face was red．‘The AOL！Earth Commander knows about the AOL，and he is the best man—’
　　‘Excuse me，’Kiah said quietly．‘We want to help Earth Commander．’
　　Bel began to laugh．‘Help？You？’the cat jumped down and walked across the room．‘How can you help？Why can't you understand？ Listen．Earth Commander is working on the spaceship for Mars．It's difficult and expensive work．’the cat jumped on to Rilla's chair and looked at her with its yellow eyes．‘Two years ago，Adai wanted more money for the AOL—and Earth Commander sent him to the colony under the Moon．Now you're talking about the AoL．Do you want to go to the Moon，too？’
　　The door opened again and a different guard came in．‘Excuse me．Earth Commander is ready now．’
　　Bel stood up．‘You can see Earth Commander now，'she said coldly．‘But you're going to be sorry！’
　　The guard opened a different door，and Bel and the cat went into a beautiful room with expensive，very old tables and chairs．Rilla and Kiah went in behind them．There were no windows in the room，but a lot of pictures．There was Gog！The richest man on Earth；and the worst man on Earth．He was tall and fat，and without much hair．He sat behind a big table with a television，three computers and five telephones．He watched the television and didn't look at Kiah or Rilla．Two guards with guns stood behind him and two more guards stood near the door．
　　‘Here they are！’Bel said．‘They aren't friends，oh no！They want to talk about the AOL，of course．No one under-stands about Mars—’
　　‘That's all right，that's all right，’Gog said quickly．And then he looked up，first at Rilla and then at Kiah．His eyes were cold and green．‘I know about you two，’he said．‘Your captain told me about you．You're famous！Two children！You want to help planet Earth，is that right？’He waited．The cat jumped on to his table and sat down in front of the television．
　　‘Yes，Commander，’Kiah began．‘The AOL is breaking up—’
　　‘When？Tonight？Tomorrow？’Gog said angrily．‘I heard this old story two years ago，from Adai．Everyone comes here and wants money-money for the AOL，money for rain，money for the Moon colony．But I am Earth Commander，and you are nobody！I know about the AOL and the AOL is good for a hundred years！’
　　‘But the satellite—’Kiah began again．
　　‘Be quiet！’Gog cried．‘I am Earth Commander！I'm not going to give money for the AOL！Or for rain！Or for the Moon！’Gog looked at the guards near the door．‘Take them —take them away．I don't want to hear them．’
　　The guards moved behind Kiah and Rilla，and Bel began to laugh．‘Goodbye！'she said．‘You're not going to the Moon，you're going to prison！You can talk about the holes in the AOL there！’






■ 4 Prison 888
　　Commander Zadak was in his room at the biggest hotel in Kisangani．Suddenly，he heard the phone．
　　‘Commander？’someone said，very quietly．‘A man and a woman—from Ship OM-45—in prison 888．’the phone went dead．Zadak put the phone down，stood up，and left his room．
　　Prison 888 was a big white building without windows，near Gog's house．There were a lot of guards at the gate，and some more guards marched past the bulding．All the guards carried guns．
　　Commander Zadak walked across the road to the prison．‘I want to visit someone．My name is Commander Zadak．’
　　‘I'm sorry，Commander，’a guard said．‘We can't open the gate．Nobody can go in without a letter from Earth Commander．’
　　‘That's all right，’Zadak said，and walked along the road，past the prison．
　　A guard ran behind him．‘Excuse me，Commander，’he said quickly．‘Please come back tonight．I can open the back gate at midnight．You can see the two people from Ship OM-45．’
　　Zadak looked at the guard．‘Your captain's going to kill you．’
　　The guard smiled．‘My captain phoned you about the two people from OM-45．He's the brother of Captain Seru．’
　　Zadak didn't smile．‘The prison commander is going to kill you and your captain．’
　　‘It doesn't matter，’the guard said．‘We want to help．’
　　‘Midnight，’Zadak said，and walked away．
　　At midnight there were four guards at the front gate of prison 888，and there was one guard at the back gate．The guard opened the gate and Zadak went in．The guard said nothing．They walked downstairs into a big room．A lot of prisoners slept on the floor because there were no beds or chairs．Kiah and Rilla sat on the floor near the door．
　　‘You can talk for five minutes，’the guard said quietly．
　　‘The next guard arrives at 12．15．’
　　Kiah and Rilla stood up．‘Good evening，Commander，’they said．
　　Zadak looked at the prisoners．‘Why are all these people here？’he said to Kiah and Rilla．‘They're in prison because Gog doesn't like them．I talk to Gog about rain，I talk to him about the AOL，but he never listens．Today，someone told me about some fires in the new forest here in Africa；but Gog doesn't want to hear about those fires．’Zadak laughed angrily．‘And he doesn't want to hear about my trees in Australia．He never listens to me．He's always thinking about Mars，Not about our beautiful planet Earth．’
　　Kiah listened carefully．‘Take it easy，Commander，’he said quietly．‘Please talk to Adai．Adai wants to help．He can come back from the Moon and help you．’
　　‘No，’Zadak said．‘I phoned Adai this afternoon． He's a good man and he wants to help．But I don't need help．I'm going to stop Gog：I'm going to kill him．’
　　Kiah closed his eyes for a minute．‘Gog's guards have guns．They can kill you，Commander，’he said．‘You need more people to help．Wait for Adai．He can help you to look for more people．’
　　‘No，Kiah’，Zadak said quietly．‘I don't want more people．Adai can come back to Earth after Gog is dead—after I am dead，perhaps．I don't want Adai to die，too．’
　　‘Excuse me，Commander，’the guard said．He looked at the clock near the door．
　　‘OK．Let's go，’Zadak said to the guard．He looked at Rilla and then at Kiah．His eyes were very blue．‘Goodbye，’ he said．
　　‘Goodbye，Commander，’Kiah said．
　　‘Be careful！’Rilla cried．‘And good luck！’
　　Early that morning，Earth Commander's house was quiet．A guard opened the door．
　　‘Good morning， Commander Zadak，’he said．‘Earth Commander isn't in his office．’
　　‘That's all right，’Zadak said．‘I can wait．’
　　Zadak went upstairs and waited．
　　At eight o'clock Bel came into the room．‘Good morning，Commander，'she said．‘You're early this morning．Are you happier today？Earth Commander was very angry with you yesterday．Don't begin talking about rain or the AOL today．’
　　Zadak smiled，but his blue eyes were cold．‘No，’he said．‘I'm not going to talk about rain today．’
　　Just then，Gog came into the room．He looked at Zadak．‘What's wrong？Why are you here at eight o'clock in the morning？’
　　Zadak took his gun from his pocket．Gog saw the gun and his face went white．His eyes were dark and afraid．For a sec-ond nobody moved．
　　Suddenly，Bel's black and white cat ran into the room．
　　‘Guards！Guards！’Bel shouted．
　　The cat jumped at Zadak，and Zadak hit the cat away from him．Bel ran across the room to Gog and Zadak，at that second，shot at Gog．But Bel was between him and Gog．She gave a cry and fell to the floor．Her hair looked very red on the black floor．
　　‘No！’Gog cried．‘You shot Bel！’
　　Three guards ran into the room with their big guns and stood in front of Gog．
　　‘Kill him！’Gog shouted，and began to help Bel．
　　Zadak looked at the guards and then at Bel and Gog．Kiah was right：he was going to die．
　　‘I'm sorry，Kiah．I'm sorry，Adai，’he said quietly．The guards shot Zadak．Slowly，he fell to the floor．






■ 5 Forest fires
　　Later that morning，four guards took Rilla to Gog's of-fice．His face looked tired and his eyes were red．
　　‘Leave us，’he said to the guards．Then he looked at Rilla．‘Tell me about Kiah．When did you first meet him？Is Zadak his friend？What do they talk about？’
　　Rilla looked down at the floor and said nothing．
　　‘Come on，tell me！’Gog said angrily．He waited，but Rillasaid nothing．‘Tell me about Zadak，then．Your father and Commander Zadak were friends．Now， you're talking to Zadak about the AOL．I know that．What is Zadak saying？’
　　‘Why？Why do you want to know about Commander Zadak？’Rilla asked．
　　‘I'm asking the questions，not you，’Gog said．‘Did you see Zadak yesterday？’
　　‘The AOL is important，not Commander Zadak，’Rilla said．
　　Gog watched Rilla carefully．‘Zadak is dead．’
　　‘No！’Rilla cried．
　　‘He is dead，’Gog said again．‘You lost your friend，here in this building，early this morning．My guards shot him．’
　　Rilla's face went white．‘What happened？Tell me！’
　　‘I'm going to tell you one thing，’Gog said angrily．‘I'm going to destroy Australia．I'm going to burn Zadak's new forest there．You can tell all your friends！Zadak wanted to kill me，but I killed him．He wanted money for rain，money for the AOL，and now he's dead．You can tell all those prisoners in prison 888．They wanted to stop me，but they can't now．I'm going to Mars！Bel always wanted to go to Mars．’He began to hit the table with his hand．‘I'm going to leave this dead planet！Nobody can stop me！’
　　‘You're crazy，’Rilla said．‘You killed Zadak，but one day someone is going to kill you．’
　　Gog stood up．His face was tired and he looked ill．‘Be qui-et！’he said．‘Guards！Take her away．Back to 888．’
　　The guards came in and took Rilla out．
　　‘What happened？’she asked them．‘Commander Zadak is dead；why is Gog angry？’
　　The guards said nothing．But after they returned to the gate of 888，a guard said to Rilla，very quietly：‘Bel is dead．Zadak didn't shoot Gog，but he shot Bel，before the guards shot him．’
　　A guard took Rilla into the prison， and soon she was with Kiah again．
　　‘What happened？’Kiah asked．‘Tell me．’
　　Rilla put her hands over her face and began to cry．‘Zadak is dead，’she began．‘He didn't kill Gog．He killed Bel before the guards shot him，and now Gog is going to destroy Australia．’
　　Kiah sat down on the floor next to Rilla．His face was sad．
　　‘Don't cry，’he said quietly．
　　Three or four prisoners came across the room．
　　‘What's the matter？’they asked．
　　‘Zadak is dead，’Kiah said．‘But Bel is dead，too．’
　　‘What's going to happen next？’someone asked．But nobody answered．
　　The next afternoon，Captain Seru's brother took Kiah and Rilla to a little room at the back of the prison．They sat down，and five minutes later Captain Seru arrived．Nobody smiled．
　　‘You were right，Captain，’Kiah said．‘Gog sent us to prison because we told him about the holes in the AOL．’
　　Seru smiled．‘You were right，Kiah，’she said．‘Those satellite numbers were very bad．I began to tell Gog，but he didn't listen to me．’
　　‘Would you like some coffee？And some sandwiches？’seru's brother asked．
　　‘Yes，please，’seru said．‘I'm hungry．’she looked at Kiah and Rilla．‘Things are very bad．’
　　‘What's happening？’Rilla asked．
　　‘You know about Zadak？And Bel？’
　　‘Yes．Gog told Rilla yesterday，’Kiah said．
　　Seru smiled，but her eyes were not happy．‘Gog talked to me this morning，'she said．Her brother came in with the coffee and sandwiches and Seru began to eat．‘Gog wants to know about Zadak，and about you，’she said．‘He's going to kill us all，I think，before he goes to Mars．’
　　Suddenly，Rilla felt ill．‘I can't eat now！’she cried．But she took some coffee and began to drink．‘Let's get out of here，’she said．‘Perhaps we can get a plane to Brazil and go to my family．’
　　‘Difficult，’seru said．‘Last night fires began in the new forest in Europe，and they're moving across Europe．The fires in Africa are burning fast．Gog began to destroy Zadak's forest in Australia yesterday．’
　　‘Did you phone Adai？’Kiah asked．
　　‘Adai！You never stop talking about Adai．What can he do？’Rilla said．She felt angry．
　　Seru looked at Rilla for a minute．‘Yes，I phoned Adai be-fore I came here．I told him about Zadak and Bel，and about the fires．He asked about you，Kiah．He can't come down at Kisangani airport because Gog is there with a lot of his guards．Ship MARS 4 is nearly ready and Gog is watching it．He wants to leave Earth tomorrow．’
　　‘How can Adai help us？’Rilla asked．‘He can't shoot all the guards here．’
　　Captain Seru finished the last sandwich．‘Let's leave that to Adai，’she said．‘We can do nothing．’
　　‘Are you going to stay here？’Kiah asked．
　　‘Yes，'seru answered．‘Adai is coming to the prison after he arrives on Earth．’
　　‘Oh yes？’Rilla said tiredly．‘But when？Gog can kill us before Adai comes．’‘No，he can't，’seru's brother said．‘You can stay here，in this room．Gog's guards are all afraid—afraid of the fires，afraid of the people．They aren't going to look for you here．’






■ 6 Spaceship to the Moon
　　And so they waited．And waited．Rilla slept in her chair．Kiah and Seru talked quietly．Seru's brother came and went．Most of the prison guards ran away with the prisoners．Seven or eight people—some prisoners and some guards—didn't want to run away，so they came into the room and waited，too．
　　Ten o'clock came，then eleven o'clock．It was very quiet．Seru walked up and down the room．Kiah sat next to Rilla．Seru's brother came into the room again．
　　‘It's after midnight，’he said．
　　Just then， they heard the noise of a plane．Kiah stood up．‘Come on，’he said．‘Let's get out of the building．’
　　Quietly，they left the building．It was a dark，hot night．There were no guards in front of the prison，so they went to the gate and waited there．Suddenly，they saw the plane．It was a little plane，and it was going to come down on the road in front of the prison！
　　Rilla took Kiah's hand．‘You were right，’she said．‘I'm sorry．’
　　Kiah smiled．He began to feel happy．‘That's all right．I understand．I know Adai very well，and you don't．’
　　The plane stopped and someone opened the door．Kiah ran across to the plane．
　　‘How many can you take？’he called．‘There are twelve of us．’
　　‘That's all right，’someone said．‘Quickly，the spaceship is waiting．’
　　The twelve people got into the little plane，and the plane be-gan to move．Rilla looked at the captain of the plane．He was tall，with brown hair．He looked nice．Was this the famous Commander Adai？
　　‘Where is the spaceship？’Kiah asked．
　　‘At the old airport，’the man said．‘One of the fires is moving very quickly across the new forest．It's going to arrive at the west of Kisangani before tomorrow，I think．But the old airport is OK．’then the man looked at Kiah and smiled warmly．‘My brother’，he said．‘My little brother，in prison 888！’
　　‘Your brother？Commander Adai？’Rilla asked．‘But you didn't tell me that！’
　　Kiah smiled．‘Nobody knew，’he said．‘But now—it doesn't matter now．Everyone can know．’
　　The little plane came down at the old airport，south of the town．
　　‘Let's be careful，’Adai said．‘We don't want someone to shoot us before we leave．’
　　The spaceship was dark．Quickly，everyone jumped down from the plane and ran across to the spaceship．Soon， the spaceship left Earth，and everyone looked down at the burning planet．They saw the dark smoke over Africa，and here and there，through the smoke，the red，angry fires．
　　‘The fires are destroying the forest very quickly，’seru said．
　　Adai put his hand on Kiah's arm．‘I'm sorry about Zadak，’he said．
　　‘I wanted him to wait，’Kiah said．‘I wanted him to talk to you．’
　　Adai's face was sad．‘He didn't want me to die，’he said quietly．‘He was a good man．And now he's dead．’
　　‘And Gog is going to Mars，’seru said．
　　‘Mars？He's crazy！Mars isn't ready for people，’Adai said．
　　‘But Gog wants to go，and so he's going，’seru said．‘Tell us about the Moon colony．That isn't ready：you need more money．’
　　‘No，I don't，’Adai said．‘The Moon colony is ready．I asked for more money because of Zadak：I wanted to give him money for rain．But Gog didn't listen；he wanted all Earth's money for the spaceship to Mars．’
　　‘I don't want to leave Earth，’Rilla said sadly．She felt tired and afraid．
　　Adai smiled warmly at Rilla．‘Nobody wants to leave Earth，’he said．‘But under the Moon is the best home for us now．Wait and see．The Moon colony is a beautiful，wonderful country，with rivers and rain，forests and flowers，buildings—and the first town．You can visit Earth again soon，and bring more people to the Moon colony．We all want to help Earth，because it's our first home．I know that．At the same time，you are going to be happy under the Moon．’
　　Suddenly，someone cried：‘Look at the Moon！’
　　And through the window of the spaceship they saw the Moon before them，cold，white and beautiful；and under the Moon，there was the Moon colony！




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Witches of Pendle by Rowena Akinyemi





■ 1 THE PEDLAR
　　The spring of 1634 arrives， but in the prison of Lancaster Castle it stays cold．The twenty women in the prison are dirty， hungry and cold． There are no beds or chairs and so they sleep on the cold floor．There are no windows，so it is al-ways dark．The women want to get out of the prison；they want to go home．Sometimes the guards open the big，old door and put some bread and water on the floor． Then they close the door again．
　　My name is Jennet Device， and I am one of the twenty women in prison．Day after day， I sit on the cold floor and wait．I want to feel warm again； I want to see the sky again， and Pen-dle Hill， the beautiful hill near my home． But I am in the dark prison of Lancaster Castle， and I sit on the cold floor and wait．
　　One day， something happens． The guards open the big， old door．'Jennet Device！'a guard calls．'Come here at once，witch！Somebody wants to see you．'
　　I get up slowly because I'm very cold and I walk across the dark room to the door． Perhaps it' s someone from Read Hall！Perhaps I'm going home！ 'Jennet Device，be quick！'the guard calls again．
　　Someone is standing at the door with the guard．'Jennet，'he says quietly．
　　I see him then： a tall man with brown hair and tired blue eyes．He is not from Read Hall．It is Mr Webster，from the church at Kild wick．My legs stop moving and suddenly I want to sit down．
　　'Come on， come on，' the guard says angrily． He begins to close the door．
　　'Come out here for a minute， Jennet，' Mr Webster says quietly．'Sit down and eat something．'
　　I sit down at a little table near the door．Mr Webster gives me some bread and some meat and I begin to eat hungrily．
　　'Ten minutes，'the guard says．'After ten minutes，she goes in again．
　　'Thank you，'Mr Webster says．
　　'How is everyone at Read Hall？'I ask at last．
　　Mr Webster smiles．'Everyone is well． I was there yesterday．'
　　I close my eyes for a minute．' Mr Webster， it' s not true．I'm not a witch， you know．'
　　'I know，Jennet，'Mr Webster says．'Last week， I brought Edmund Robinson and his father into my church， and asked them about the boy's story． Many people believed Edmund' s story，but some people didn' t．Edmund Robinson is going to London tomorrow with his father， and a judge is going to ques-tion them．'
　　The guard comes back and begins to open the door．
　　' Time！' he says．
　　Mr Webster stands up．'God is here with you，Jennet．Never forget that．You can be happy，when God is with you．'
　　I stand up too， and take the bread from the table．' Yes， Mr Webster． God is with me； I believe that．' But happy？How can I be happy？
　　I go back into the dark prison， and the guard closes the door behind me．The women run to me．'Bread！Give us bread！'they cry．
　　Quickly， I put the bread in my shirt．I don't want to lose it．I walk across the room and sit down on the floor． I am crying，but I feel a little better． Edmund Robinson， of Newchurch， is only ten years old． Edmund told lies about me and about many women： he saw us at a witches' meeting at a house called Hoarstones．It's not true，but many people believed him．What is he going to say in London？ The truth？ Or more lies．
　　But now， in the prison of Lancaster Castle， I want to tell my story． It is a story about rich men and angry villagers；about old women and hungry children． It is a true story， and it happened to me．
　　I was born in 1603． My family was always very poor， and after my father died， we were poorer． In winter， I was often ill and I was always cold and hungry． In summer， I was sometimes ill and I was often cold and hungry．We lived some miles from the village of New church， in an old house called Malkin Tower． It was dirty and cold．The rain came in through the windows and there were no doors． To the west， was the big hill called Pendle．Pendle Hill was beautiful．I loved Pendle Hill because it sat quietly all year and watched me．
　　My story begins on the eighteenth day of March in the year 1612． I was nine years old， and my life began to change on that day．My mother and my grandmother were ill and they sat on the floor，with their dogs，near the little fire．
　　My sister Alizon wanted to go out．'I'm going to look for bread，'she said．
　　My brother James sat near the fire，his mouth open．'Go and look for bread，'he said．'Go and look for bread．'James often said things again and again．
　　Alizon ran out of the house and I followed her．
　　'Go and look for bread！'James called．
　　Alizon began to go east， up the hill and past the big trees be-hind Malkin Tower．Alizon walked fast． She was eighteen years old and she was tall with long，dirty brown hair and a white，hungry face． It was cold， but there was no rain ．Alizon wore a coat and some shoes， but I had no coat and no shoes．
　　' Please wait a minute！' I called to my sister．' I want to come with you．'
　　'No！'Alizon cried．'Go back， I don't want you．'
　　Suddenly， a dog ran in front of Alizon．
　　' Good dog， good dog！' Alizon called． The dog ran to her and she put her band on its head． It was my sister' s dog and it liked her． It was a big dog with big teeth and I didn' t like it because it was always hungry．
　　I followed Alizon and her dog along the river to Colne．But before we arrived at Colne， we met John Law．John Law was a big fat man， about fifty years old．
　　'Can I have some money， please？'Alizon called．'I'm hun-gry·
　　John Law didn' t answer． He walked slowly because he was fat and because he carried a big bag on his back．In his bag were a lot of beautiful things．He was a pedlar and he walked across the hills and visited all the villages．
　　'Can I have some money？'Alizon called again．'I'm very hungry！'
　　John Law stopped．' Stop following me，' he said．' I'm not going to give you money．'
　　'Give me money！'Alizon said．
　　'I don' t want to give you money，' the pedlar said． He took his hat off．There was not much hair on his head．'I don't like you and I don' t like your family． A lot of bad women， you are，and your father was a bad man， too．'
　　Alizon was angry．'Don't talk about my father—he' s dead now！ Give me some money， old man！'
　　John Law' s face was red．' No！' he cried． He began to walk up the hill to the village．'Go back to your dirty family！'
　　Alizon began to laugh angrily．'A dead man！A dead man！'she called．'Dead before dark，John Law！'She looked down at her dog and put her hand on its head．'Go after him，dog，'she said．'Go after him and get him！'
　　The big dog began to run after the pedlar．John Law stopped．He looked afraid and his face was very red．'Call your dog back，you bad girl！'he shouted．
　　Suddenly，his mouth opened and his face went white．Slowly，he began to fall，and his big body hit the road．The dog came up to him，but the pedlar did not move．
　　Alizon watched John Law for a minute．Then she said to me，'Go and call someone from the village．'
　　I felt afraid，but I ran alog the road very quickly．'Help！Help！'I called to the villagers．'The pedlar is ill'
　　The villagers came out of their houses and followed me down the hill．A young man looked at John Law carefully．
　　'He's not dead，'he said，'but he' s very ill．Let' s move him to the nearest house．Someone must go and call his son．'
　　Just then， John Law began to talk very slowly．'I can' t move！' he said．' I 'm alive， but I can' t move！'
　　I went back to stand near Alizon．The dog sat at her feet．
　　'That Device girl…'John Law said slowly，'she—she cursed me！ She wanted me to die！ And her dog came to get me．
　　All the villagers looked at Alizon．
　　'I 'm sorry，'Alizon said quickly．'I'm very hungry and I wanted some money，that's all．'
　　'Go away！' the villagers cried．'You' re a witch， and we don' t want you in our village．'
　　Alizon began to run away down the hill and her dog followed． I watched the villagers．They carried John Law slow-ly up the hill to the nearest house．And then I followed my sis-ter down the hill．I was hungry and tired and Malkin Tower was many miles away． I was nine years old and I was angry． I was angry because the pedlar was ill．I was angry because the villagers didn' t like me ．And I was angry because my sister was a witch．






■ 2 ROGER NOWELL
　　John Law was ill because Alizon cursed him， and his son wanted Roger Nowell to question Alizon．Roger Nowell was a rich and important man in Lancashire， and he was the judge for all the villages near Pendle Hill．He lived at Read Hall， seven miles from Newchurch．
　　On the thirtieth day of March，Mr Nowell's men came to Malkin Tower．Mr Nowell wanted to see Alizon at once．
　　We walked from Malkin Tower to Read Hall： my sister Ali-zon，my brother James，and our mother，Elizabeth Device． I fol-lowed them because I didn' t want to stay at home with my grandmother． My grandmother was a difficult old woman， and I didn' t like her．
　　Read Hall was an old house with a big garden and many old trees．Mr Nowell's servant opened the door for us．
　　'Come in，'Mr Nowell said．He was a tall man with a lot of white hair．His black coat looked warm and expensive．
　　Alizon followed Mr Nowell into a room with a big fire．When I saw the fire， I wanted to go in，too！
　　'Are you cold，little one？'Mr Nowell asked me．'Come in，and sit near the fire．'
　　I went across the room and sat down on the floor， next to the wonderful， hot fire．
　　Mr Nowell sat behind a big fable． Two or three men， in black coats， stood near the window． Alizon stood in front of Mr Nowell． Her long hair was dirty， and her old dress looked dirti-er．
　　'Two weeks ago，on the eighteenth day of March， you met John Law near Colne，'Roger Nowell said．His voice was slow and careful．'Tell me about it．'
　　'I asked for money，'Alizon said．'The pedlar was very an－gry and I didn' t like him． I was angry， too， and I wanted him to die！'
　　' Tell me about your dog．'
　　“The dog is my friend．'Alizon said slowly．'I wanted a friend， and I found that dog two months ago． I told my grand－mother， and she liked the dog， too．'
　　'Did the dog run after the pedlar？'
　　'Yes， of course． I cursed the pedlar， and the dog ran after him！'Alizon said．' I'm sorry now， because Mr Law is ill．'
　　'She's a witch！'one of the men said quietly．
　　Roger Nowell stood up and walked across the room to the door．'James Device， come in． We want to question you．'
　　James came in and stood next to Alizon．James was thirteen years old， nearly a man， but he was afraid of many things． He began to cry．
　　'Don't be afraid，'Mr Nowell said．'we want you to talk abut your grandmother，Old Demdike．'
　　But Alizon wanted to talk．'Don' t ask him！' she said quick-ly．'I can tell you about my grandmother because I'm with her every minute of the day． I go with her from village to village． I go with her across Pendle Hill．She asks people for money and food， and I help her．'Alizon stopped．She looked at James， and then she looked at Mr Nowell．'She cursed a child once， and the child died later that year．'
　　'And you！'James said．'You cursed a child， too！Somebody told me！'James suddenly sat down on the floor and began to laugh loudly．
　　'Be quiet！'Roger Nowell said coldly．'Alizon Device，tell me the truth：did you curse a child？'
　　'Yes， I did，'Alizon cried．'The child called me a witch， and I was angry． I cursed the child，but I was sorry when the child died．'
　　James looked up at Alizon， his mouth open．'The child died，the child died，'he said again and again．
　　'Alizon Device，you cannot go home again，'Roger Nowell said slowly．'You must go to the prison at Read．'
　　'But I need Alizon！'my mother shouted angrily from the door．'She takes care of Old Demdike，my mother．'
　　I looked at my mother， at her red， angry face． I looked at Al-izon in her dirty dress， and at James on the floor with his mouth open．And then I looked at Mr Nowell：his brown eyes were warm， and his face was kind．
　　On the second day of April， Roger Nowell and his men came to Ashlar House， near the village of Fence． Mr Nowell wanted to talk to my grandmother， and we all went with her to Ashlar House． Fence was not far from Malkin Tower， and my grand-mother walked there easily．
　　Old Demdike was a little old woman with a fat face and no teeth．She was nearly eighty years old and she was a difficult old woman．Without Alizon，she was more difficult because my mother didn' t take care of her．
　　When I saw Mr Nowell again at Ashlar House， I felt happy．I looked at his kind face and his warm brown eyes， and I want-ed to be near him． But there were a lot of people in the room，and I was afraid to go to him．
　　'Old Demdike ， I'm going to ask you some questions， 'Mr Nowell began．
　　Old Demdike was not afraid． She looked at all the men， in their expensive coats and hats． 'What can a poor old woman tell you rich men？'She laughed， and when she laughed I felt afraid．My grandmother was going to tell them everything！
　　And she did！
　　'Twenty years ago，I met the Devil，'Old Demdike said．'He was a boy called Tibb and he was my friend．Then a cat came to visit me—a beautiful cat—and then a dog．They were all my friends．'
　　Mr Nowell listened quietly to my grandmother， but some of the men began to talk angrily．
　　'Be careful，you rich men！'my grandmother cried．'I can curse you！ I can kill people！ I make clay pictures of people—man，woman or child．And when I break the clay，that man，woman or child dies！'
　　People began to shout．
　　' She' s a witch！ She must die！'
　　'Say no more； she must die， with all her family！'
　　Roger Nowell stood up．'Be quiet！'He looked at the guards near the door．'Take her away，'he said．'Old Demdike and her granddaughter Alizon must go to the prison at Lancaster Castle．'
　　The guards took my grandmother by the arms and carried her out of the door and put her on a horse．Everyone ran out of Ashlar House．They ran after the horses and shouted：'Kill the witch！'
　　I looked for Mr Nowell， but he was on his horse， too， and he followed the guards quickly through the village．
　　Slowly， I followed my mother and James．Malkin Tower was my home， but I didn' t want to go back there． I was a little child， and I wanted someone kind to take care of me．
　　We stayed at home days， because we were afraid to go out．James sat in front of the fire， with his dog， and talked．'Lan-caster Castle， Lancaster Castle，' he said， again and again． My mother hit me and shouted at me because she was angry with the rich men．
　　But after three days，my mother suddenly said，'James！We' re hungry and we must eat！'
　　James didn' t answer．
　　My mother went across the room to James and pulled his hair．'Get up！'she shouted．'Go out and find food for us！Your father isn' t here now； you must find food for us．' She hit him over the head．
　　James stood up slowly．'Go out and find food，'he said．'I must go out and find food．'
　　It was dark， and James was out for hours． But in the morn-ing， he came back with a sheep．
　　'I went to Barley，'James said happily．'I got this sheep，and now we can eat．'
　　'Get up， Jennet！'my mother shouted 'Come and help me！'
　　It was Friday， the tenth day of April． My family had some friends， poor people， and on that day they came to Malkin Tower．They came and asked about Old Demdike and Alizon，and they stayed to eat and drink．
　　I helped my mother． We cooked the sheep over a big fire，and our visitors ate with us． At the same time， they drank．They sat by the fire and drank，and talked about Lancaster Castle．
　　'Let 's go there！'an old woman cried．'Let 's go to Lancast-er Castle and find Old Demdike and Alizon！'
　　'We can curse the guards， and break down the door！' my mother said．
　　'Let' s bring them home！' said an old man．
　　'Jennet，bring the bottle！ We need more drink！'shouted my mother．
　　I got up and took more drink to my mother．But I fell over one of the dogs， and the bottle broke on the floor． The drink was gone！
　　' You bad child！' my mother shouted．'You' re a witch， too，you know！'She got up and began to hit me．She hit me over the head and pulled my hair．An old man laughed，and then ev-eryone laughed．
　　I ran back across the room．I wasn 't a witch；I was a child，nine years old，and I hated my mother and all her friends！ My face felt very hot because I was angry． I left the room and went out of the house． It was afternoon， but the sky was dark with rain．Pendle Hill was dark，too．It sat quietly and watched me．
　　'I'm going to Mr Nowell，' I said quietly， to Pendle Hill．'I'm going to tell him about my mother and her friends．'






■ 3 A FAMILY OF WITCHES
　　I ran from Malkin Tower，down the hill into Newchurch．James followed me．
　　'I want to go to Read Hall，too，'he said．
　　We ran through the trees to Sabden Brook．The noise of the river was beautiful in my ears．We went along the river to the village of Sabden， and then it began to rain．
　　Suddenly，we heard the noise of horses behind us．We got off the road， and watched the horses． It was Roger Nowell with some of his men． They saw us， and Mr Nowell stopped．
　　'It' s the Device children，' he said．' What's your name，child？'
　　'My name is Jennet，' I said．'We 're going to Read Hall． I want to talk to you．'
　　Roger Nowell looked at me with his warm brown eyes．'Very well，'he said．'Come home with me，and we can talk．'He lifted me up on to his horse， and the horse moved quickly a－long the road to the village of Read．James ran along behind us．
　　Very soon，we arrived at Read Hall．The servant opened the door for us，and we went into the warm house．James came in，too， and sat down next to me near the fire．
　　Mr Nowell put his black hat down on the table．'Bring a hot drink and some food for these children，'he told the servant．' They' re cold and hungry．'
　　The servant brought bread and hot milk for us， and James and I ate hungrily． I felt warm and happy in Mr Nowell' s house．I wanted to stay there all my life； I never wanted to go back to Malkin Tower．
　　When we finished eating，Mr Nowell looked up from his book．'You wanted to talk to me，'he said quietly．'Well， I'm listening．'
　　I got up ，went across the room and stood in front of Mr Nowell．' I'm afraid of my mother，' I began．' I'm afraid be-cause she' s a witch and she can kill people．'
　　The room was quiet．Mr Nowell said nothing，but his brown eyes were kind．
　　'My mother and her friends are at Malkin Tower，'I told him．'They want to go to Lancaster Castle and kill the guards．They' re going to bring Old Demdike and Alizon home again．'
　　Mr Nowell got up and left the room．After some time， he came back with two of his friends．They all sat down at the table．
　　'Jennet， I want you to tell me again about your mother and her friends．'
　　'They want to kill the guards at Lancaster Castle and bring Old Demdike home to Malkin Tower，'I said．Then I began to cry．
　　'Den't cry，'Mr Nowell said kindly．'We can help you，but we must talk to your brother first．James！'he called．'Tell me about your mother． Is she a witch？'
　　' She' s a witch． We' re all witches，' James began．' Old Demdike's a witch．One night，she went to the church at Newchurch and got some teeth from dead bodies there．The Devil talked to her and she brought the teeth to Malkin Tower．They're under the ground by our door！'
　　' Old Demdike' s a witch； we know that，' Mr Nowell said．'Tell us about your mother．'
　　'Mother' s a witch，' James said．' She killed Mr Robinson，from Barley village． She made a clay picture， and then she broke it， and Mr Robinson died a week later．'James smiled at Mr Nowell． He liked Mr Nowell because Mr Nowell didn' t shout at him．'And I'm a witch， too！ I can kill people！'
　　'No， James！' I cried．' You' re not a witch！ You don' t kill people！'
　　' Yes， I do，'James said angrily． His face went red．' My dog，Dandy， is the Devil and he killed a man for me． I wanted a shirt and Mr Duckworth was going to give me one of his old shirts．But in the end， he didn' t give it to me and I was very angry． I nearly killed Mr Duckworth！But I called Dandy，and he killed Mr Duckworth for me！'
　　I began to cry．My brother was a witch，too！ All my family were witches！
　　'Don't cry，Jennet，'Mr Nowell said．'Someone must take care of you．You can stay here at Read Hall with me．'
　　When Mr Nowell' s men brought my mother to Read Hall， she said nothing at first．
　　'Tell us about the pictures of clay，'Mr Nowell said．'My men found pictures of clay at Malkin Tower．'
　　My mother said nothing．
　　'Your mother，Old Demdike，is a witch．Your daughter is a witch，'Mr Nowell said．'Your son killed Mr Duckworth be－cause of shirt．Now，tell us about the clay pictures．'
　　My mother said nothing．
　　'James told us about Mr Robinson of Barley，'Mr Nowell said ．' Did you kill him？'
　　Suddenly， my mother' s face went red and she began to shout at James．'A good son，you are！ You told this rich man about Jack Robinson of Barley． Well， you told the truth． I killed him！ I made a clay picture， and then I broke it， and a week later he died．I killed him because I hated him．'
　　She stopped and looked at me ． I wanted to run away but Mr Nowell's servant stood in front of the door．Then my mother laughed． 'Jennet Device， witch' s daughter！ You hate us， I know that． Well， it doesn' t matter because you're right： you are different．You 're my daughter，but you're not the daugh-ter of my husband． Your father was a rich man， but he never gave me money．A witch' s child，he called you．And when you were born，he never came near me ngain．Jack Robinson learnt the truth about your father．He told the villagers of Barley and they called me a bad woman， but they didn 't call your father a bad man！ Nobody in Barley gave me food again， because of Jack Robinson．I hated him，and so I killed him！'
　　The room was very quiet and my mother laughed again．
　　My hands felt cold and my face was hot， but I didn' t cry．When Mr Device died， I cried for days． But he was not my fa-ther．I looked at my mother，at her dirty hair and her ugly face， at her angry eyes． I hated her then， and I hated her for many years．






■ 4 TRUTH AND LIES
　　On the twenty-seventh day of April， the guards took my mother and James to Lancaster Castle， and my life at Read Hall began．Suddenly，it was spring．The sky was blue and there were beautiful flowers on the hills． From Read Hall，Pendle Hill looked different ： it looked smaller， and it was not so important in my life．Sometimes I walked along Sabden Brook to Sabden， and then to Newchurch， and I felt happy to be near Pendle Hill again．But I never visited Malkin Tower again．
　　Spring changed into summer，and in August I went to Lan－caster with Mr Nowell． Lancaster was thirty miles from Read Hall， and I got very tired because I sat on a horse for hours． It was a big， noisy town． I never saw so many people before in my life and I felt afraid．
　　The trial of the witches of Pendle began at Lancaster Castle on the eighteenth day of August， and the judge was an impor-tant man from London．Judge Bromley listened to many people on that day， because there were a lot of witches from Lan-cashire in the prison．Old Demdike was not there because she died in May， before the judge arrived．
　　I waited with Mr Nowell' s servant， and when a guard called my name， I went through a big door and saw the judge behind a table． Judge Bromley was rich and important， but his eyes were cold．Suddenly， I saw my mother！ She was dirty and very thin．When she saw me，her face went red．My hair was clean now， and I wore shoes and an expensive dress． I saw my mother' s eyes： she hated me！
　　'Are you a witch？'Judge Bromley asked my mother．
　　'No， I 'm not，'my mother answered angrily．
　　'Did you kill Jack Robinson，of Barley village？'
　　' No， I did not．'
　　'Jennet Device is here，' a voice said quietly． It was Mr Nowell．'She can tell us the truth about her mother．'
　　For a minute， my mother did not move． Then she ran across the room and shouted at me． 'You know nothing， you bad child！ And I'm your mother！Don' t forget that！'
　　The guards ran after my mother and pulled her to the floor．
　　' I'm no witch！'my mother shouted．' It' s all lies！ Jennet，you' re a witch—a child of the Devil！ You' re my daughter，and I know！'
　　I was afraid and I put my hands over my eyes． I didn't want to see my mother' s ugly face． The guards pulled my motherout of the room and the noise stopped．
　　'Jennet Device，'the judge said．'Tell us the truth about your mother．'
　　Roger Nowell lifted me up and put me on a table in front of the judge．
　　'My mother is a witch，'I began．'She has a friend， a dog called Ball． When she wants to kill somebody， she tells Ball…'I talked and talked；I told the judge everything．
　　Judge Bromley listened carefully．'My child，is this the truth？'
　　'Yes，'I answered．'I'm telling you the truth．'
　　The guards brought my mother back into the room again．Her face looked tired and her eyes were red．
　　'Elizabeth Device，your daughter told us about your dog，Ball． Your son， too， told us about the clay pictures． We know everything．'
　　My mother said nothing．She didn't look at the judge and she didn' t look at me．
　　Next， the guards brought my brother James into the room．When I saw James，I wanted to cry．James was thin and dirty and his hair was very long．He looked at the judge and at all the rich and important men in the room and he began to cry．Then he sat down on the floor．
　　'Stand up，James Device，'Judge Bromley said．
　　The guards pulled James up，but he fell to the floor again．
　　'You killed Mr Duckworth，'Judge Bromley said．
　　'I wanted a shirt，'James cried．
　　'Is your brother a witch？'Judge Bromley asked me．
　　' Yes，' I said． My brother sat on the floor， his mouth open．He looked at me，but he didn't know me． I was clean，and fat because of all the good food at Read Hall．
　　'James told me about his friend，Dandy，'I began．'Dandy was the Devil and—'
　　James heard the name Dandy，and he began to cry again．'I want Dandy！I want to go home！'
　　The guards pulled him up from the floor and took him out of the room． I never saw my brother again．
　　When the guards brought my sister Alizon in front of the judge， I said nothing．John Law，the pedlar，came into the room．He was a thin man now．He walked slowly and he talked slowly and his face looked ill ．He told the judge about that day near Colne when Alizon cursed him and her dog ran after him．
　　'I'm sorry！' Alizon said．' I was angry with you that day，but I'm sorry now．' Alizon 's eyes were dark and afraid， but she had no friends in that room and nobody wanted to listen to her．
　　Then Mr Nowell took me out and I waited with his servant in a different room． An hour later， there was the noise of many people shouting and crying．
　　The servant smiled．'The trial is finished，' he said 'You' re a good child Jennet．You told the judge the truth about the Witches．'
　　Mr Nowell took me home to Read Hall．And on the twen－tieth day of August 1612，the guards took my mother，my sis－ter and my brother out of prison ，and hanged them in front of Lancaster Castle．
　　And so I lost my family．
　　When I was a child， I wanted to be happy．I wanted to be warm， to wear shoes， to eat good food． I wanted someone to take care of me．That's all． My mother gave me nothing． She gave me no love．She never took care of me．Because my moth－er was a witch，my father ran away and I never knew him．My father was a rich man without a name， and I lived hungry and cold with a witch．And so I told Judge Bromley the truth about my family．Was I wrong？I don't know．
　　I was happy for years at Read Hall． For twenty-one years， I forgot my family．I learned to cook for the Nowell family；I worked many hours every day but I was warm and I ate good food．Every Sunday，in my best dress，I went to church；every summer I walked over Pendle Hill．I never thought about my family， because I was happy at Read Hall．
　　In August 1612，the guards hanged my family in front of Lancaster Castle． But their dead faces waited for me there； and a year ago， in 1633，when the guards put me in the prison in Lancaster Castle， I met them again． Day after day， I see their ugly， dead faces and hear their cold， angry voices． I think of them all the time． God is with me here，in prison． I believe that． But my dead family is with me too．
　　Mr Webster，from the church at Kildwick，visits me again．His blue eyes are tired，but he smiles at me．
　　'Edmund Robinson and his father told the truth in London， 'he says quietly．' The child told lies about you be-cause he was afraid of his father． He wanted his father to love him．'
　　I say nothing． Mr Webster wants to be kind， but he cannot help me．Mr Nowell cannot help me because he is dead．Ed-mund Robinson is only a child； he tells lies one day， and the truth the next day．But the truth cannot help me．What can I do against hate ，and lies？When Mr Nowell was alive，the Vil-lagers didn't talk about me．But when Mr Nowell died，the lies began．The villagers are all afraid of me——because my name is Device．They hate me——because my name is Device．They say I am a witch—— because my name is Device．
　　I come from a family of witches， but I am not a witch． No－body died because I cursed them．I never made clay pictures， I never had a cat or dog．I only wanted to live quietly at Read Hall and watch the changing skies over Pendle Hill．
　　When I was a child， I was always cold and hungry， and I hated my family because they were witches． In 1612， I told the truth， and the truth killed my family． Now， twenty－two years later，lies are going to kill me， here in Lancaster Castle， and I am cold and hungry again．
　　Mr Webster gives me bread，and I go back into the prison．I can never go back to Read Hall；I know that now．I must stay here in Lancaster Castle， with my dead family．
　　They are watching me， and waiting for me． I can never be free of them．
　　This is my true story； and I want to finish it now．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Phantom of the Opera by Jennifer Bassett





■ 1 The dancers
　　'Quick！Quick！Close the door！It's him！'Annie Sorelli ran into the dressing－room， her face white．
　　One of the girls ran and closed the door， and then they all turned to Annie Sorelli．
　　'Who？Where？What's the matter？' they cried．
　　'It's the ghost！'Annie said．'In the passage．I saw him．He came through the wall in front of me! And…and I saw his face！'
　　Most of the girls were afraid， but one of them， a tall girl with black hair，laughed．
　　'Pooh!'she said．'Everybody says they see the Opera ghost， but there isn't really a ghost．You saw a shadow on the wall．'But she did not open the door，or look into the passage.
　　'Lots of people see him，' a second girl said．'Joseph Buquet saw him two days ago. Don't you remember？'
　　Then all the girls began to talk at once．
　　'Joseph says the ghost is tall and he wears a black evening coat．'
　　'He has the head of a dead man， with a yellow face and no nose…'
　　'…And no eyes-only black holes！'
　　Then little Meg Giry spoke for the first time．'Don't talk about him．He doesn't like it．My mother told me．'
　　'Your mother？' the girl with black hair said．'What does your mother know about the ghost？'
　　'She says that Joseph Buquet is a fool． The ghost doesn't like people talking about him，and one day Joseph Buquet is go ing to be sorry， very sorry．'
　　'But what does your mother know？ Tell us，tell us！' all the girls cried．
　　'Oh dear！'said Meg．'But please don't say a word to any one．You know my mother is the doorkeeper for some of the boxes in the Opera House．Well，Box 5 is the ghost's box！He watches the operas from that box，and sometimes he leaves flowers for my mother！
　　'The ghost has a box！ And leaves flowers in it！'
　　'Oh， Meg，your mother's telling you stories！How can the ghost have a box？'
　　'It's true， it's true，I tell you！'Meg said．'Nobody buys tickets for Box 5， but the ghost always comes to it on opera nights．'
　　'So somebody does come there？'
　　'Why，no！… The ghost comes， but there is nobody there．'
　　The dancers looked at Meg．'But how does your mother know？' one of them asked．
　　'There's no man in a black evening coat， with a yellow face．That's all wrong．My mother never sees the ghost in Box 5，but she hears him！ He talks to her，but there is nobody there！And he doesn't like people talking about him！'
　　But that evening the dancers could not stop talking about the Opera ghost．They talked before the opera， all through the opera, and after the opera． But they talked very quietly， and they looked behind them before they spoke．
　　When the opera finished，the girls went back to their dress ing-room．Suddenly，they heard somebody in the passage，and Madame Giry， Meg's mother， ran into the room． She was a fat，motherly woman，with a red，happy face．But tonight her face was white．
　　'Oh girls，'she cried'．'Joseph Buquet is dead！ You know he walks a long way down，on the fourth floor under the stage．The other stage workers found his dead body there an hour ago -with a rope around his neck！'
　　'It's the ghost!'cried Meg Giry．'The ghost killed him！'






■ 2 The directors of the Opera House
　　The Opera House was famous， and the directors of the Opera House were very important men．It was the first week of work for the two new directors， Monsieur Ar mand Moncharmin and Monsieur Firmin Richard．In the direc tors' office the next day，the two men talked about Joseph Bu quet．
　　'It was an accident，' Monsieur Armand said angrily．'Or Buquet killed himself．'
　　'An accident？…Killed himself？' Monsieur Firmin said．'Which story do you want，my friend？ Or do you want the sto ry of the ghost？'
　　'Don't talk to me about ghosts！'Monsieur Armand said．'We have 1，500 people working for us in this Opera House，and everybody is talking about the ghost． They're all mad! I don't want to hear about the ghost， OK？'
　　Monsieur Firmin looked at a letter on the table next to him．
　　And what are we going to do about this letter，Armand？'
　　'Do？' cried Monsieur Armand．'Why， do nothing， of course！ What can we do？'
　　The two men read the letter again．It wasn't very long．
　　To the new directors
　　Because you are new in the Opera House，I am writing to tell you some important things．Never sell tickets for Box 5；that is my box for every opera night． Madame Giry， the door keeper， knows all about it． Also，I need money for my work in the Opera House．I am not expensive，and I am happy to take only20，000 francs a month． That is all． But please remem ber， I can be a good friend， but a bad enemy．
　　O．G．
　　'Don't sell tickets for Box 5! 20，000 francs a month!'Monsieur Armand was very angry again．'That's the best box in the Opera House， and we need the money， Firmin！ And who is this O．G，eh？Tell me that！'
　　'Opera Ghost，of course，'Monsieur tirmin said．'But you're right， Armand. We can do nothing about this letter． It's a joke， a bad joke. Somebody thinks we are fools， because we are new here．There are no ghosts in the Opera House！'
　　The two men then talked about the opera for that night． It was Faust，and usually La Carlotta sang Margarita．La Carlotta was Spanish，and the best singer in Paris．But today，La Carlot ta was ill．
　　'Everybody in Paris is going to be at the opera tonight，'said Monsieur Armand，'and cur best singer is ill．Suddenly！ She writes a letter to us just this morning-she is ill， she cannot sing tonight！'
　　'Don't get angry again， Armand，' Monsieur Firmin said quickly.'We have Christine Daaé， that young singer from Nor way．She can sing Margarita tonight．She has a good voice．'
　　'But she's so young， and nobody knows her！Nobody wants to listen to a new singer．'
　　'Wait and see．Perhaps Daaé can sing better than La Carlot ta．Who knows？'






■ 3 Christine Daaé
　　Monsieur Firmin was right．All Paris talked about the new Margarita in Faust，the girl with the beautiful voice,the girl with the voice of an angel．People loved her.They laughed and cried and called for more．Daaé was wonder ful，the best singer in the world！
　　Behind the stage Meg Giry looked at Annie Sorelli．'Chris tine Daaé never sang like that before．'she said to Annie．'Why was she so good tonight？'
　　'Perhaps she's got a new music teacher，'Annie said．
　　The noise in the Opera House went on for a long time． In Box 14，Philippe，the Comte de Chagny，turned to his younger brother and smiled．
　　'Well， Raoul， what did you think of Daaé tonight？'
　　Raoul，the Vicomte de Chagny，was twenty－one years old．He had blue eyes and black hair，and a wonderful smile．The Chagny family was old and rich，and many girls in Paris were in love with the young Vicomte．But Raoul was not interested in them．
　　He smiled back at his brother．'What can I say？ Christine is an angel， that's all． I'm going to her dressing-room to see her tonight．'
　　Philippe laughed． He was twenty years older than Raoul， and was more like a father than a brother．
　　'Ah， I understand，'he said．'You are in love！ But this is your first night in Paris， your first visit to the opera． How do you know Christine Daaé？'
　　'You remember four years ago，when I was on holiday by the sea，in Brittany？'Raoul said．'Well， I met Christine there． Iwas in love with her then，and I'm still in love with her today！'
　　The Comte de Chagny looked at his brother．'Mmm， I see，'he said slowly．'Well， Raoul， remember she is only an opera singer．We know nothing about her family．'
　　But Raoul did not listen．To him，good families were not im portant，and young men never listen to their older brothers．
　　There were many people in Christine Daaé's dressing－room that night．But there was a doctor with Christine，and her beautiful face Looked white and ill．Raoul went quickly across the room and took her hand．
　　'Christine！ What's the matter？ Are you ill？' He went down on the floor by her chair．'Don't you remember me Raoul de Chagny，in Brittany？'
　　Christine looked at him，and her blue eyes were afraid．She took her hand away．'No， I don't know you．Please go away．I'm not well．'
　　Raoul stood up， his face red． Before he could speak， the doc tor said quickly，' Yes， yes， please go away． Everybody， please leave the room．Mademoiselle Daaé needs to be quiet．She is very tired．'
　　He moved to the door，and soon everybody left the room.Christine Daaé was alone in her dressing－room．
　　Outside in the passage the young Vicomte was angry and unhappy．How could Christine forget him？How could she say that to him？ He waited for some minutes， then，very quietly and carefully，he went back to the door of her dressing－room．But he did not open the door， because just then he heard a man's voice in the room!
　　'Christine，you must love me！' the voice said．
　　Then Raoul heard Christine's voice．'How can you talk like that？ When I sing only for you…？ Tonight， I gave everything to you， everything． And now I'm so tired． 'Her voice was un happy and afraid．
　　'You sang like an angel，' the man's voice said．
　　Raoul walked away．So that was the answer！ Christine Daaéhad a lover．But why was her voice so unhappy？ He waited in the shadows near her room． He wanted to see her lover-his enemy！
　　After about ten minutes Christine came out of her room，alone， and walked away down the passage． Raoul waited， but no man came out after her． There was nobody in the passage，so Raoul went quickly up to the door of the dressing－room，opened it and went in．He closed the door quietly behind him，then called out：
　　'Where are you？ I know you're in here！Come out！'
　　There was no answer．Raoul looked everywhere-under the chairs， behind all the clothes，in all the dark corners of the room．There was nobody there．






■ 4 The Phantom is angry
　　That was Tuesday night．On Wednesday morning Mon sieur Armand and Monsieur Firmin were happy men．Paris liked the new Margarita-everything in life was good．The next opera night was Friday． It was Faust again， but this time with La Carlotta singing Margarita．
　　By Wednesday afternoon they were not so happy．A second letter arrived for them-from O．G．
　　Why don't you listen to me？ I am getting angry． Leave Box 5 free for me． And where are my 20， 000 francs？ On Friday Daaé must sing Margarita again．She is now the best singer in Paris． La Carlotta cannot sing-she has a very ugly voice，like a toad．
　　Remember， I am a bad enemy． O． G．
　　'So，Firmin，is this still a joke？'Monsieur Armand shouted．
　　'What are we going to do now， eh？ Is O． G． the director here，or are we？'
　　'Don't shout，Armand，'said Monsieur Firmin tiredly．'I don't know the answers．Let's talk to Madame Giry， the door keeper of Box 5．Perhaps she can help us．'
　　But Madame Giry was not helpful．Madame Giry was not afraid of ghosts， and she was not afraid of directors of Opera Houses.
　　'People say that you're a friend of the Opera ghost，Madame Giry，' Monsieur Armand began．'Tell us about him．Some people say he has no head．'
　　'And some people say he has no body，' said Monsieur Firmin．'What do you say， Madame Giry？'
　　Madame Giry looked at the two men and laughed．'I say that the directors of the Opera House are fools！'
　　'What！'Monsieur Armand shouted． He stood up，and his face was red and angry．'Listen to me，woman-'
　　'Oh， sit down， Armand，and listen，' said Monsieur Firmin．'why do you say that，Madame Giry？'
　　'Because，Monsieur，the Opera ghost is angry with you．When the ghost wants something， he must have it． He is clever and dangerous，this ghost．The old directors before you， they knew that，oh yes. At first they tried to stop him. Then there were many accidents in the Opera House，many strange acci dents．And when did these accidents happen？ When the ghost was angry！So，the old directors learnt very quickly．The ghost wants Box 5？ He can have it every night．The ghost wants money？Let's give the money to him at once．Oh yes，the old directors understood very well．'
　　'But we are the directors， not the Opera ghost！' Monsieur Armand shouted．He turned to Monsieur Firmin．'This woman is mad．Why do we listen to her？ On Friday night La Carlotta is going to sing Margarita． And you and I， Firmin，are going to watch the opera from Box 5．' 'Well， we can try that， Armand． But we don't want any ac cidents．'
　　Madame Giry came nearer to the two men．'Listen to me，'she said quietly．'Remember Joseph Buquet？ I tell you，the Opera ghost is a good friend， but a bad enemy．'
　　The two men stared at her．'Those words，Monsieur Firmin said slowly，'why did you say those words， Madame Giry？'
　　'Because the ghost says them to me． I never see him， but I often hear him．He has a very nice voice and he doesn't shout at people．'



　　5 A letter for Raoul
　　That Wednesday a letter also arrived for the young Vi comte de Chagny．He opened the letter，saw the name at the bottom， and smiled for the first time that day．
　　Dear Raoul
　　Of course I remember you！How could I forget you？
　　Meet me on Thursday at three o'clock in the Tuileries Gar dens．Don't be angry with me，Raoul，please．
　　Christine Daaé
　　Raoul put the letter carefully into his pocket. Angry？ How could he be angry with an angel？ On Thursday he was in the Tuileries Gardens by two o'clock．
　　At ten past three he began to feel unhappy．At half past three he wanted to die， or to kill somebody．
　　And then… she came． She ran through the gardens to him，and in a second she was in his arms．
　　'Oh，Christine！'he said，again and again．'Oh， Christine！'They walked through the gardens together and talked for a long time． They remembered their happy weeks in Brittany，four years ago．
　　'But why did you go away，Christine？' Raoul asked．'Why didn't you write to me？'
　　For a minute or two Christine said nothing．Then she said slowly，'We were so young， you and I．I was just a poor singer from Norway，and you…you were the Vicomte de Chagny．I knew I could never be your wife．'
　　'But I love you，Christine-'
　　'No，shh．Listen to me，Raoul，please．I went home to Nor way，and a year later，my father died．I was very unhappy，but I came back to France，to Paris．I worked and worked at my singing，because I wanted to be an opera singer． Not just a good singer， but the best opera singer in Paris．'
　　'And now you are，' Raoul said．He smiled．'All Paris is at your feet．'
　　Christine turned her face away and said nothing．
　　'Christine，' Raoul said quietly．'I want to ask you a ques tion．Who was the man in your dressing－room on Tuesday night？ Tell me，please!'
　　Christine stopped and stared at him． Her face went white．'What man？'she whispered．'There was no man in my dress ing－room on Tuesday night．'
　　Raoul put his hand on her arm．'I heard him，' he said．'I listened outside the door and heard a man's voice． Who was he？'
　　'Don't ask me，Raoul！There was a man's voice，yes，but there was no man in my room！ It's true！Oh，Raoul，I'm so afraid．Sometimes I want to die．'
　　'Who is he？ Tell me， Christine，please．I'm your friend，I can help you．Tell me his name！'
　　'I cannot tell you his name． It's a secret，' whispered Chris tine．'I never see him， I only hear his voice．But he is everywhere！ He sees everything，hears everything．That's why I didn't speak to you on Tuesday night．He is my music teacher， Raoul．He's a wonderful singer．I sang so well on Tuesday night because of him． I am famous because of him．He is my angel of music！And he says he loves me．How can I leave him？'



　　6 La Carlotta sings Margarita
　　On Friday morning La Carlotta had her break fast in bed．She drank her coffee and opened her morning let ters．One letter had no name on it. It was very short．
　　You are ill． You cannot sing Margarita tonight．Stay at home and don't go to the Opera House. Accidents can hap pen．Do you want to lose your voice-for ever？
　　La Carlotta was very， very angry. She got out of bed at once and did not finish her breakfast．
　　'This is from Christine Daaé' s friends，' she thought．'They want her to sing again tonight．That Daaé girl is going to be sorry for this！ I，La Carlotta， I am the best opera singer in Paris．And nothing is going to stop me singing Margarita tonight！'
　　At six o'clock that evening the dancers were in their dress ing-room．They talked and laughed and put on their red and black dresses for Faust．But Meg Giry was very quiet．
　　'What's the matter，Meg？'Annie Sorelli asked．
　　'It's the Opera ghost，Meg said．'My mother says he's angry．She's afraid that something's going to happen tonight．'
　　'Oh，pooh！'the girl with black hair said．'Who's afraid of an old ghost？'
　　An hour later Monsieur Armand and Monsieur Firmin went into Box 5 and sat down．They were not afraid of ghosts.Of course not．There were no ghosts in the Opera House．
　　Then Monsieur Armand saw some flowers on the floor by the door of the box．'Firmin，'he whispered，'did you put those flowers there？'
　　Monsieur Firmin looked．'No，I didn't，'he whispered back'Did you？'
　　'Of course not， you fool！Shh，the music's beginning．'
　　La Carlotta did not sing for the first hour．There were no strange voices in Box 5，and the two directors began to feel happier. Then La Carlotta came out onto the stage， and Mon sieur Firmin looked at Monsieur Armand．
　　'Did you hear a voice just then？' he asked quietly．
　　'No！'Monsieur Armand said，but he looked behind him twice， then three times， and suddenly felt cold．
　　La Carlotta sang and sang， and nothing happened. Then she began a beautiful love song．
　　'My love begins to-Co－ack！'
　　Everybody stared．What was the matter with Carlotta's voice
 What was that strange noise-Co－ack

　　Carlotta stopped and began the song again．
　　'My love begins to-Co－ack！
　　I cannot forget my-Co-ack！'
　　It was the noise of a toad！ People began to talk and laugh.Monsieur Firmin put his head in his bands．Then he felt Mon sieur Armand's hand on his arm．There was a voice in the box with them！ A man's voice，laughing
　　Poor Carlotta tried again，and again．
　　'I cannot forget my-Co－ack！'
　　Then the two directors heard the voice again， behind them，in front of them， everywhere．'Her singing tonight is going to bring down the chandelier!'
　　The two directors looked up at the top of the Opera House．Their faces were white．The famous chandelier， with its thou sand lights，broke away from its ropes and crashed down on to the people below．
　　That was a terrible night for the Paris Opera House．One woman was killed by the chandelier， and many people were hurt．The Opera House closed for two weeks．And La Carlotta never sang again.



　　7 My angel of music
　　For a week Raoul saw Christine every day．Some days Christine was quiet and unhappy，some days she laughed and sang. She never wanted to talk about the Opera House， or her singing， or Raoul's love for her． Raoul was very afraid for her．Who， or what，was this strange teacher，this man's voice，her'angel of music'？
　　Then one day there was no Christine．She was not at her home, not at the Opera House，not at their meeting places Raoul looked everywhere and asked everybody．Where was Christine Daaé？But nobody knew．
　　Two days before the Opera House opened again，a letter ar rived for Raoul．It was from Christine．
　　Meet me in an hour at the top of the Opera House，on the tenth floor．
　　The tenth floor of the Opera House was a dangerous place.There were hundreds of ropes going down to the stage below it was a long，long way down.
　　Raoul and Christine sat in a dark corner，and Raoul took Christine's hands. Her face was white and tired．
　　'Listen，Raoul，'she said quiety.'I'm going to tell you ev erything．But this is our last meeting. I can never see you again.'
　　'No，Christine！'Raoul cried．' I love you，and we-'
　　'Shh! Quietly! Perhaps he can hear us．He's everywhere in the Opera House， Raoul!'
　　'Who？What are you talking about，Christine？'
　　'My angel of music．I couldn't meet you last Satuday be cause he came for me，and took me away．I was in my dressing room in the Opera House and suddenly，he was there in front of me! I saw the voice for the first time！ He wore black evening clothes and a mask over his face. He took me throughmany secret doors and passages，down，down under the Opera House．There is a lake down there，a big lake； the waters are black and cold．He took me across the lake in a boat to his house．He lives there，Raoul，in a house on the lake，under the Opera House!'
　　Raoul stared at her．Was his beautiful Christine mad？ Chris tine saw his face，and said quickly：
　　'It's true，Raoul，It's true! And he…，he is the Phantom of the Opera！But he's not a ghost，he's not an angel of music，he's a man！His name is Erik，and he loves me，he wants me to be his wife！No，Raoul，listen， there is more．He told me all this in his house，in a beautiful room．He said that no woman could everlove him，because of his face．He was so unhappy! Then he took off his mask，and I saw his face．'
　　She began to cry，and Raoul put his arms around her．
　　'Oh Raoul，he has the most terrible face！It is so ugly! I wanted to scream and run away．But where could I run to？ He has the face of a dead man，Raoul，but he is not dead！He has no nose，just two black holes in his yellow face．And his eyes！Sometimes they are black holes，sometimes they have a terrible red light…'
　　She put her face in her hands for a second．Then she said，'I stayed in his house for five days．He was very good to me，and I felt sorry for him， Raoul． He wants me to love him， and I told him…I told him…'
　　'No，Christine，no！You're going to be my wife！Come away with me at once，today！You can't go back to him．'
　　'But I must，' Christine said quietly．'He knows about you，Raoul．He knows about us．He says he's going to kill you．I must go back to him．'
　　'Never!' said Raoul．'I love you，Christine，and I'm going to kill this Erik！'
　　Erik…Erik…Erik…Erik… The word whispered round the Opera House．Raoul and Christine stared．
　　'What was that？' Raoul said， afraid．'Was that… his voice？Where did it come from？'
　　'I'm afraid，Raoul，'Christine whispered．I'm singing Margarita again on Saturday．What's going to happen？'
　　'This，'Raoul said．'After the opera on Saturday night，you and I are going away together．Come on，let's go down now．I don't like it up here．'
　　They went carefully along a dark passage to some stairs，then suddenly stopped．There was a man in front of them, a tall man in a long dark coat and a black hat．He turned and looked at them．
　　'No，not these stairs，'he said．'Go to the stairs at the front．And go quickly!'
　　Christine turned and ran．Raoul ran after her．
　　'Who was that man？' he asked．
　　'It's the Persian，' Christine answered．
　　'But who is he？ What's his name？ Why did he tell us to go to the front stairs？'
　　'Nobody knows his name．He's just the Persian. He's al ways in the Opera House．I think he knows about Erik，but he never talks about him．Perhaps he saw Erik on those stairs， and wanted to help us．'
　　Hand in hand，they ran quickly down the stairs，through passages，then more stairs and more passages．At one of the lit tle back doors to the Opera House，they stopped．
　　'On Saturday night，then．After the opera，'Raoul said．
　　'I'm going to take you away，and marry you．'
　　Christine looked up into his face．'Yes，Raoul．'
　　Then they kissed， there by the door of the Opera House．Their first kiss．






■ 8 Where is Christine Daaé？
　　On Saturday morning Comte Philippe looked across the breakfast table at his brother．
　　'Don't do it，Raoul，please．All this talk about ghosts and phantoms．I think the girl is mad．'
　　'She's not mad，and I'm going to marry her，'Raoul said．
　　'She's only a little opera singer，'Philippe said unhappily．
　　'And she's very young．Are you still going to love her in ten，or twenty，years' time？'
　　Raoul drank his coffee and did not answer．
　　There were two more unhappy faces in the Opera House，too．The directors now understood about O．G．They didn't want any more accidents．
　　'Box 5 is free tonight for O．G． Daaé is singing Margarita．And here is 20，000 francs．Madame Giry can leave the money in Box 5 for him．Is that everything？'Monsieur Armand asked Monsieur Firmin.
　　'It's a lot of money，'Monsieur Firmin said unhappily．He thought for a minute．'What about some flowers in Box 5？Madame Giry says that O．G．likes flowers．'
　　'O．G．can bring his own flowers！' shouted Monsieur Ar mand．
　　The evening began well．The chandelier was now back in place， with new ropes．All Paris was in the Opera House．Ev erybody wanted to hear Christine Daaé's voice again．People also knew about the love story between Christine Daaé and the Vicomte de Chagny．There are no love secrets in Paris！People watched the Comte and the Vicomte in Box 14 with interest．Young men from families like de Chagny do not marry opera Singers.
　　When Christine came onto the stage，her face was white and she looked afraid．But she sang like an angel．Ah， what a voice！All Paris was in love with Christine Daaé．
　　She began to sing the famous love song．Suddenly，every light in the Opera House went out．For a second nobody moved or spoke．Then a woman screamed，and all the lights came on again.
　　But Christine Daaé was no longer on the stage！She was not behind the stage， she was not under the stage．Nobody could find her．
　　The Opera House went mad．Everybody ran here and there，shouted and called． In the directors office， people ran in and out．The police came，and asked questions. But nobody could answer the questions．Monsieur Armand got angry and shouted，and Monsieur Firmin told him to be quiet．Then Madame Giry arrived in the office with her daughter Meg．
　　'Go away，woman！'Monsieur Armand shouted．
　　'Monsieur，there are three people missing now!'Madame Giry said．'Meg，tell the directors your story．'
　　This was Meg's story．
　　'When the lights went out，we were just behind the stage．We heard a scream-I thlnk it was Christine Daaé's voice．Then the lights came back on，but Christine wasn't there！we were very afraid，and we began to run back to our dressing room．There were people running everywhere！ Then we saw the Vicomte de Chagny．His face was red and he was very an gry．“Where's Christine？ Where's Christine？he shouted．Suddenly the Persian came up behind him and took his arm．He said something to the Vicomte and they went into Christine Daaé's dressing－room…'
　　'Yes？ And then？' Monsieur Firmin said quickly．'What happened next？'
　　'Nobody knows！' Meg's face was white．'We looked into Christine Daaé's dressing－room，but…but there was nobody there!'






■ 9 The house on the lake
　　When the lights came on， Raoul ran．He ran down stairs and along passages，through the Opera House to the back of the stage．In the passage outside Christine's dressing room，a hand took his arm． 'What's the matter，my young friend？Where are you run ning to，so quickly？'
　　Raoul turned and saw the long face of the Persian under his black hat．
　　'Christine！'Raoul said quickly．'Erik's got her．Where is she？Help me！ How do I get to his house on the lake？'
　　'Come with me，'said the Persian．They went quickly into Christine's dressing－room.The Persian closed the door and went to the big mirror on one wall．
　　'There's only one door into this room，'Raoul began．
　　'Wait，'the Persian said．He put his hands on the big mirror， first here， then there．For a minute nothing happened．Then the mirror began to move and turn，and a big dark hole opened in it．Raoul stared．
　　'Quick！Come with me，but be careful，'the Persian said．'I know Erik．I understand his secrets．Put your right hand up near your head，like this，and keep it there all the time．' 'But why？'Raoul asked．
　　'Remember Joseph Buquet，and the rope around his neck？Erik is a clever man with ropes in the dark．'
　　They went down， down， down，under the Opera House．They went through secret doors in the floors， then along pas sages and down dark stairs. The Persian listened carefully all the time for strange noises．
　　'When do we get to the lake？' Raoul whispered．
　　'We're not going by the lake．Erik watches it all the time．No，we go round the lake and get into Erik's house from the back．I know some secret doors．'
　　Soon they were there．In the dark，the Persian felt the wall carefully with his hands．'Ah，here it is，'he whispered．The wall moved under his hands and a small door opened．Very qui etly，they went through，and then the door closed behind them． They could not get out．
　　Inside the room it was very dark．They waited and listened．The Persian put his hands on the wall．
　　'Oh no！'he whispered．'It was the wrong door！ This is Erik's torture room-the room of mirrors！We are dead men，Vicomte de Chagny，dead men！'
　　At first Raoul did not understand．But he soon learnt．The lights came on， and they heard a man's laugh．Erik knew they were there．
　　The room was all mirrors-walls，floor，ceiling．There were pictures in the mirrors of trees and flowers and rivers. The pic tures moved and danced in front of their eyes． And the room was hot． It got hotter and hotter and hotter．Raoul was thirsty，hot and thirsty，and the rivers in the pictures danced and laughed at him．He closed his eyes，but the rivers still danced．Water，he needed water，but the mirrors laughed at him．Soon he could not move or speak， or open his eyes．He was not thirsty now，just tired，so tired．'Oh Christine， I'm sorry，'he thought．'I wanted to help you，and now I'm dying…'
　　Through a mirror in the wall Christine watched her lover in the torture room．Behind her Erik stood，with his hands on her arms．
　　'He's dying，Christine，dying．Watch him carefully．No，don't close your eyes．Watch him！'
　　Christine could not speak．She wanted to scream，but no words came．Then she found her voice again．
　　How can you do this，Erik！ Why don't you kill me？'
　　'Because I love you，Christine．Marry me，be my wife，and love me．Then Raoul and the Persian can live．'
　　Slowly，Christine turned．She looked into Erok's terrible，ug ly face，and spoke again，very quietly．
　　'Yes，Erik．From this minute I am your wife．'She put her arms around Erik's neck，and kissed him-kissed him slowly and lovingly on his ugly mouth．Then she took her arms away and said slowly，'Poor，unhappy Erik．'
　　Erik stared at her．You kissed me! he whispered．' I didn't ask you，but you kissed me-freely！Oh Christine，my angel！That was my first kiss from a woman．Even my mother never kissed mee! She gave me my first mask when I was two years old．She turned her face away from me every time I came near her.'
　　Erik put his ugly face in his hands and cried．Then he went down on the floor at Christine's feet．'You are free，Christine，free！Go away and marry your Raoul，and be happy．But re member Erik，sometimes．Go now，quickly！Take Raoul and the Persian，and go！'






■ 10 Madame Giry visits the Persian
　　For weeks，all Paris talked about that night at the opera．Everybody asked questions，but nobody knew the answers．Where was Christine Daaé？ Where was the Vi comte de Chagny？ Were they alive，or dead？
　　And the Phantom of the Opera…？
　　Some weeks after that famous night Madame Giry went out one afternoon to a small house near the Rivoli Gardens．She went in and up the stairs to some rooms at the top of the house．The Persian opened the door．
　　Madame Giry looked at him．'My friend， you know the an swers．Please tell me．Are they alive or dead？'
　　'Come in，'the Persian said quietly．
　　They sat down on some chairs by the window，and looked out across the Rivoli Gardens．
　　'Yes，'the Persian said slowly，'The Phantom is dead now．He did not want to live any longer．I saw his body three days ago，and because of that， I can talk to you about him．He can not kill me now．'
　　'So the Phantom was really a man？' Madame Giry asked．
　　'Yes，his name was Erik．That was not his real name，of course．He was born in France，but I knew him in Persia．He was a famous builder and I worked with him there．For a time I was his friend，but not for long．When he came to Paris， I came after him-I wanted to watch him. He was a very clever，very dangerous man．He could be in two，or three，places at the same time． He could be in one place，and his voice could come from another place．He could do many clever things with ropes，and mirrors，and secret doors．You see，he helped to build the Opera House．He built secret passages underground，and his secret house on the lake．He could not live in the outside world， because of his terrible， ugly face． Unhappy Erik！ We can feel sorry for him， Madame Giry．He was so clever…and so ugly．People screamed when they saw his face．And so he lived this strange life half-man，half-phantom．But he was a man，in the end．He wanted a woman's love…'
　　He stopped，and Madame Giry asked quietly，'And Christine Daaé and Vicomte Raoul？What happened to them？'
　　The Persian smiled．'Ah yes！What happened to young Raoul and the beautiful Christine…？Who knows？'
　　Nobody in Paris ever saw Raoul and Christine again.Perhaps they took a train to the north，and lived a quiet，happy life to gether there．Perhaps Christine's wonderful voice is still singing，somewhere in the cold and beautiful mountains of Norway．Who knows？




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Monkey's Paw by W.W. Jacobs





■ Chapter 1
　　It was cold and dark out in the road and the rain did not stop for a minute．But in the little living－room of number 12 Castle Road it was nice and warm．Old Mr White and his son， Herbert， played chess and Mrs White sat and watched them． The old woman was happy because her husband and her son were good friends and they liked to be together．'Herbert's a good son，' she thought．'We waited a long time for him and I was nearly forty when he was born， but we are a happy family．' And old Mrs White smiled．
　　It was true．Herbert was young and he laughed a lot， but his mother and his father laughed with him． They had not got much money， but they were a very happy little family．
　　The two men did not talk because they played carefully． The room was quiet， but the noise of the rain was worse now and they could hear it on the windows． Suddenly Old Mr White looked up．'Listen to the rain！' he said．
　　'Yes， it's a bad night，' Herbert answered．'It's not a good night to be out． But is your friend， Tom Morris，coming tonight？'
　　'Yes， that's right． He's coming at about seven o'clock，'the old man said．'But perhaps this rain…'
　　Mr White did not finish because just then the young man heard a noise．
　　'Listen！'Herbert said．'There's someone at the doornow．'
　　'I didn't hear a noise，' his father answered， but he got up from his chair and went to open the front door． Mrs White got up too and began to put things away．
　　Mr White said，'Come in， come in， Tom． It's wonderful to see you again． What a bad night！ Give me your coat and then come into the living－room． It's nice and warm in there．'
　　The front door was open， and in the living-room Mrs White and Herbert felt the cold． Then Mr White came back into the living－room with a big，red-faced man．
　　'This is Tom Morris，' Mr White told his wife and son． 'We were friends when we were young． We worked together
　　before Tom went to India． Tom， this is my wife and this is our son， Herbert．'
　　'Pleased to meet you，' Tom Morris said．
　　'Pleased to meet you， Mr Morris，' Mrs White answered．'Please come and sit down．'
　　'Yes， come on， Tom，' Mr White said．'Over here．It's nice and warm．'
　　'Thank you，'the big man answered and he sat down．
　　'Let's have some whisky，'Old Mr White said．'You need something to warm you on a cold night．' He got out a bottle of whisky and the two old friends began to drink and talk． The little family listened with interest to this visitor from far away and he told them many strange stories．



■ 1



■ Chapter 2
　　After some time Tom Morris stopped talking and Mr White said to his wife and son，'Tom was a soldier in India for twenty-one years． India is a wonderful country．'
　　'Yes，'Herbert said．'I'd like to go there．'
　　'Oh， Herbert！' his mother cried． She was afraid because she did not want to lose her son．
　　'I wanted to go to India too，'her husband said， 'but…'
　　'It's better for you here！' the soldier said quickly．
　　'But you saw a lot of strange and wonderful things in India ．I want to see them too one day，' Mr White said．
　　The soldier put down his whisky．'No！' he cried．'Stay here ！'
　　Old Mr White did not stop．'But your stories were interesting， 'he said to Tom Morris．'What did you begin to say about a monkey's paw？'
　　'Nothing！' Morris answered quickly．'Well…nothing important．'
　　'A monkey's paw？' Mrs White said．
　　'Come on， Mr Morris！ Tell us about it，' Herbert said．
　　Morris took his whisky in his hand， but suddenly he put it down again．Slowly he put his hand into the pocket of his coat and the White family watched him．
　　'What is it？ What is it？' Mrs White cried．
　　Morris said nothing． He took his hand out of his pocket．The White family watched carefully—and in the soldier's hand they saw something little and dirty．
　　Mrs White moved back， afraid， but her son，Herbert，took it and looked at it carefully．
　　'Well，what is it？'Mr White asked his friend．
　　'Look at it，' the soldier answered．'It's a little paw…a monkey's paw．'
　　'A monkey's paw！'Herbert said—and he laughed．'Why do you carry a monkey's paw in your pocket，Mr Morris？' he asked the old soldier．
　　'Well，you see，' Morris said，'this monkey's paw is magic！'
　　Herbert laughed again， but the soldier said，'Don't laugh，boy．Remember， you're young．I'm old now and in India I saw many strange things．' He stopped talking for a minute and then he said，'This monkey's paw can do strange and wonderful things． An old Indian gave the paw to one of my friends． My friend was a soldier too． This paw is magic because it can give three wishes to three people．'
　　'Wonderful！'Herbert said．
　　'But these three wishes don't bring happiness，'the soldier said．'The old Indian wanted to teach us something—it's never good to want to change things．'
　　'Well， did your friend have three wishes？' Herbert asked the old soldier．
　　'Yes，'Morris answered quietly．'And his third and last wish was to die！'
　　Mr and Mrs White listened to the story and they felt afraid， but Herbert asked，'And did he die？'
　　'Yes， he did，' Morris said．' He had no family， so his things came to me when he died． The monkey's paw was with his things， but he told me about it before he died，' Tom Morris finished quietly．
　　'What were his first two wishes， then？' Herbert asked． 'What did he ask for？'
　　'I don't know． He didn't want to tell me，' the soldier answered．
　　For a minute or two everybody was quiet， but then Herbert said，' And you， Mr Morris ：did you have three wishes？'
　　'Yes， I did，' Morris answered．'I was young． I wanted many things—a fast car， money… 'Morris stopped for a minute and then he said with difficulty，'My wife and my young son died in an accident in the car． Without them I didn't want the money， so， in the end， I wished to lose it． But it was too late．My wife and my child were dead．'
　　The room was very quiet． The White family looked at the unhappy face of the old soldier．
　　Then Mr White said，'Why do you want the paw now？You don't need it． You can give it to someone．'
　　'How can I give it to someone？'the soldier said．'The monkey's paw brings unhappiness with it．'
　　'Well， give it to me，' Mr White said．'Perhaps this time it…'
　　'No！' Tom Morris cried．'You're my friend． I can't give it to you．'then，after a minute，he said，'I can't give it to you，but，of course you can take it from me．But remember—this monkey's paw brings unhappiness！'
　　Old Mr White did not listen and he did not think．Quickly， he put out his hand， and he took the paw．
　　Tom Morris looked unhappy，but Mr White did not want to wait．
　　'What do I do now？' he asked his friend．
　　'Yes， come on， Father， Herbert said．'Make a wish！' And he laughed．
　　The soldier said nothing and Mr White asked him again，'What do I do now？'
　　At first the old soldier did not answer， but in the end he said quietly，'OK． But remember！ Be careful！ Think before you make your wish，'
　　'Yes， yes，' Mr White said．
　　'Take the paw in your right hand and then make your wish， but…'tom Morris began．
　　'Yes， we know，' Herbert said．'Be careful！'
　　Just then old Mrs White stood up and she began to get the dinner． Her husband looked at her．Then he smiled and said to her，'Come on．Help me ！What can I wish for？ We need money，of course．'
　　Mrs White laughed， but she thought for a minute and then she said，'Well， I'm getting old now and sometimes it's difficult to do everything．Perhaps I need four hands and not two． Yes， ask the paw to give me two more hands．'
　　'OK， then，' her husband said， and he took the monkey's paw in his right hand．Everybody watched him and for a minute he waited． Then he opened his mouth to make his wish．
　　Suddenly Tom Morris stood up．'Don't do it！'he cried．
　　The old soldier's face was white． Herbert and his mother laughed， but Mr White looked at Tom's face．
　　Old Mr White was afraid and he put the monkey's paw into his pocket．
　　After a minute or two they sat down at the table and began to have dinner． The soldier told the family many strange and wonderful stories about India．They forgot the monkey's paw， and because the soldier's stories were interesting，they asked him many questions about India． When Tom Morris stood up to leave， it was very late．
　　'Thank you for a very nice evening，' Morris said to the family．'And thank you for a very good dinner， 'he said to Mrs White．
　　'It was a wonderful evening for us， Tom，' Old Mr White answered．'Your stories were very interesting． Our life isn't very exciting and we don't have the money to visit India， so please come again soon． You can tell us some more stories about India．'
　　Then the old soldier put on his coat．He said goodbye to the White family， and went out into the rain．



■ 2



■ Chapter 3
　　It was nearly midnight．In their warm living-room， the two old people and their son sat and talked about the soldier's stories．
　　'India is a wonderful country，' Mr White said．'What exciting stories！ It was a good evening．'
　　Mrs White stood up to take some things into the kitchen， but she stopped and listened to Herbert and his father．
　　'Yes，'Herbert said．' Morris told some interesting stories， but， of course， some of them weren't true． '
　　'Oh Herbert！'mrs White said．
　　'Well， Mother， that story about the monkey's paw wasn't true． A dirty little monkey's paw isn't magic！ But it was a good story．' And Herbert smiled．
　　'Well，I think you're right， Herbert，' his mother said．
　　'I don't know，' Mr White said quietly．'Perhaps the story was true． Strange things can happen sometimes．'
　　Mrs White looked at her husband．'Did you give some money to Tom Morris for that paw？' she asked．'We don't have money to give away for nothing！' Mrs White was angry now．
　　'Well，yes，'her husband answered．'I did， but not much， and at first he didn't want to take it． He wanted the monkey's paw．'
　　'Well，he can't have it，'Herbert laughed．'It's our paw now and we're going to be rich and happy．Come on， Father．Make a wish！'
　　Old Mr White took the paw from his pocket．'OK，Herbert， but what am I going to ask for？ I have everything—you， your mother． What do I need？'
　　'Money，of course，'Herbert answered quickly．'We need money！ You're always thinking about money． That's be cause we haven't got very much of it． With money you can pay for this house ．It can be your house！ Go on， Father， wish for thirty thousand pounds！'
　　Herbert stopped talking and his old father thought for a minute． The room was quiet and they could hear the rain on the windows．
　　Then Mr White took the monkey's paw in his right hand． He was afraid， but he looked at his wife and she smiled at him．
　　'Go on，' she said．
　　Slowly and carefully Mr White said，'I wish for thirty thousand pounds．'
　　Suddenly he gave a cry and Mrs White and Herbert ran to him．
　　'What's the matter， Father？' Herbert asked．
　　'It moved！' Mr White cried．'The monkey's paw—it moved！'
　　They looked at the paw． It was now on the floor and not in the old man's hand． The family watched it， and they wait ed—but it did not move again．
　　So the little family sat down again and they waited． Nothing happened The noise of the rain on the windows was worse now and their little living－room did not feel nice and warm．
　　Mrs White said，'It's cold Let's go to bed．'
　　Mr White did not answer and in the end Herbert said， 'Well，there's no money，Father． Your friend's story wasn't true．'But Mr White did not answer． He sat quietly and said nothing．
　　After some time Mrs White said to her husband，'Are you OK ？'
　　'Yes，yes，' the old man answered，'but for a minute or two I was afraid．'
　　'Well， we needed that money，' Mrs White said，'but we aren't going to get it． I'm tired． I'm going to bed．'
　　After Mrs White went to bed， the two men sat and smoked for some time．
　　Then Herbert said，'Well，Father，I'm going to bed too． Perhaps the money is in a bag under your bed！Good night， Father．'And Herbert laughed and went out of the room．
　　Old Mr White sat in the cold living－room for a long time． The candle died and it was dark Suddenly， the old man saw a face at the window． Quickly， he looked again， but there was nothing there． He felt afraid． Slowly he stood up and left the cold， dark room．



■ 3



■ Chapter 4
　　The next morning the winter sun came through the window and the house felt nice and warm again． Mr White felt better and he smiled at his wife and son． The family sat down to have breakfast and they began to talk about the day．The monkey's paw was on a little table near the window， but nobody looked at it and nobody thought about it．
　　'I'm going to the shops this morning，' Mrs White said． 'I want to get something nice for dinner．Are you going to come with me？' she asked her husband．
　　'No， I'm going to have a quiet morning． I'm going to read，' her husband answered．
　　'Well， I'm not going to go out this evening，'Herbert said，'so we can go to bed early tonight．We were very late last night．'
　　'And we aren't going to have stories about monkey's paws！'Mrs White said． She was angry．'Why did we listen to your friend？' she asked her husband．'A monkey's paw can't give you things！'she stopped but the two men did not answer her．'Thirty thousand pounds！' she said quietly．'We needed that money．'
　　Just then Herbert looked at the clock and stood up．'I'm going to work，' he said．'Perhaps the postman has got the money for you in a letter．Remember， I want some of it too！'Herbert laughed and his mother laughed too．
　　'Don't laugh， son，' Mr White said．'Tom Morris is an old friend and he thinks the story is true． Perhaps it is．'
　　'Well，leave some of the money for me， 'Herbert laughed again．
　　His mother laughed too and she went to the door with him．
　　'Goodbye， Mother，' Herbert said happily．'Get some thing nice for dinner this evening at the shops．I'm always hungry after a day at work．'
　　'I know you are！' Mrs White answered．
　　Herbert left the house and walked quickly down the road． His mother stood at the door for some time and watched him． The winter sun was warm， but suddenly she felt very cold．



■ 4



■ Chapter 5
　　Slowly， Old Mrs White went back into the house．Her husband looked up and saw something strange in her face．
　　'What's the matter？'he asked．
　　'Nothing，'his wife answered，and she sat down to finish her breakfast． She began to think about Tom Morris again and suddenly she said to her husband，'Your friend drank a lot of whisky last night！ A monkey's paw！ What a story！'
　　Mr White did not answer her because just then the post man arrived． He brought two letters for them—but there was no money in them． After breakfast the two old people forgot about the money and the monkey's paw．
　　Later in the day， at about one o'clock， Mr and Mrs White sat down to eat and then they began to talk about money again． They did not have very much money， so they often needed to talk about it．
　　'That thirty thousand pounds，'Mrs White said， 'we need it！'
　　'But it didn't come this morning，' her husband answered．'Let's forget it！'
　　Then he said，'But that thing moved． The monkey's paw moved in my hand！ Tom's story was true！'
　　'You drank a lot of whisky last night．Perhaps the paw didn't move，'Mrs White answered．
　　'It moved！'Mr White cried angrily．
　　At first his wife did not answer，but then she said，'Well， Herbert laughed about it…'
　　Suddenly she stopped talking． She stood up and went over to the window．
　　'What's the matter？' her husband asked ．
　　'There's a man in front of our house，' Mrs White answered．'He's a stranger—very tall—and well－dressed． He's looking at our house…Oh，no…it's OK…He's going away…'
　　'Come and sit down！ Finish eating！'Mr White said．
　　The old woman did not listen to her husband．'He isn't going away，' she went on．'He's coming back． I don't know him—he's a stranger． Yes， he's very well—dressed…'suddenly Mrs White stopped． She was very excited．'He's coming to the door… Perhaps he's bringing the money！'
　　And she ran out of the room to open the front door．
　　The tall， well－dressed stranger stood there． For a minute he said nothing， but then he began，'Good afternoon． I'm looking for Mr and Mrs White．'
　　'Well，I'm Mrs White，' the old woman answered．'What can I do for you？'
　　At first the stranger did not answer， but then he said，'Mrs White， I'm from Maw and Meggins． Can I come in and talk to you？'
　　Maw and Meggins had a big factory and Herbert White worked there on the machinery．
　　'Yes，of course，'Mrs White answered．' Please come in．'
　　The well－dressed stranger came into the little living－room and Mr White stood up．
　　'Are you Mr White？' the stranger began． Then he went on，'I'm from Maw and Meggins．'
　　Mrs White looked at the stranger and she thought，'Perhaps he has the money… but why Maw and Meggins？And his face is very unhappy… Why？'suddenly the old woman was afraid．
　　'Please sit down，' Mr White began， but now his wife could not wait．
　　'What's the matter？'she cried．'Is Herbert…'she could not finish the question．
　　The stranger did not look at their faces—and Mr White began to be afraid too．
　　'Please， tell us！' he said．
　　'I'm very sorry，' the man from Maw and Meggins began． He stopped for a minute and then he began again．'I'm very sorry， but this morning there was an accident at the factory…'
　　'What's the matter？ Is Herbert OK？' Mrs White cried a gain．
　　'Well…' the man began slowly．
　　'Is he in hospital？ the old woman asked， very afraid now．
　　'Yes， but…' the stranger looked at Mrs White's face and stopped．
　　'Is he dead？ Is Herbert dead？ Mr White asked quietly．
　　'Dead！' Mrs White cried．'Oh no… please…not dead！ Not Herbert！ Not our son！'
　　Suddenly the old woman stopped because she saw the stranger's face． Then the two old people knew． Their son was dead！ Old Mrs White began to cry quietly and Mr White put his arm round her．
　　Some time later the man from Maw and Meggins said， 'It was the machinery—an accident Herbert called， “Help！”． The men heard him—and ran to him quickly，but they could do nothing． The next minute he was in the machinery． I'm very， very sorry，' he finished．
　　For a minute or two the room was quiet． At last Mrs White said，'Our son！ Dead！ We're never going to see him again．What are we going to do without him？'
　　Her husband said，'He was our son． We loved him．'
　　Then Mrs White asked the stranger，'Can we see him？Can we see our son？ Please take me to him． I want to see my son．'
　　But the stranger answered quickly，'No！' he said．'It's better not to see him． They couldn't stop the machinery quickly． He was in there for a long time． And at first they couldn't get him out．He was… 'the man stopped． Then he said ,'Don't go to see him！'
　　The stranger went over to the window because he did not want to see the faces of the two old people． He said nothing， but he stood there for some time and he waited．
　　Then he went back to the old people and began to talk again．'There's one more thing，' he said．'Your son worked for Maw and Meggins for six years and he was a good worker． Now Maw and Meggins want to help you at this unhappy time．'Again the stranger stopped．After a minute he began again．'Maw and Meggins want to give you some money．' Then he put something into Mr White's hand．
　　Old Mr White did not look at the money in his hand． Slowly he stood up and looked at the stranger， afraid．'How much？' Mr White asked， very quietly． He did not want to hear the answer．
　　'Thirty thousand pounds，' the stranger said．



■ 5



■ Chapter 6
　　Three days later，in the big，new cemetery two miles from their house，the two old people said goodbye to their dead son．Then they went back to their dark，old house． They did not want to live without Herbert， but they waited for something good to happen， something to help them．The days went by very slowly． Sometimes they did not talk because there was nothing to say without Herbert． And so the days felt very long．
　　Then，one night，about a week later，Mrs White got out of bed because she could not sleep． She sat by the window and she watched and waited for her son． He did not come and she began to cry quietly．
　　In the dark her husband heard her and he called，'Come back to bed． It's cold out there．'
　　'It's colder for my son，'his wife answered．'He's out there in the cold cemetery．'
　　Mrs White did not go back to bed， but Mr White was old and tired and the bed was warm． So， in the end， he went to sleep again． Suddenly he heard a cry from his wife．
　　'The paw！' she cried．'The monkey's paw！' She came back to the bed and stood there．
　　'What is it ？ What's the matter？'Mr White cried．He sat up in bed．'What's the matter？ 'he thought．'Why is she ex cited？ What's she talking about？' He looked at his wife．
　　Her face was very white in the dark．'I want it，'she said quietly， 'and you've got it！ Give it to me！ Please！'
　　'What？' Mr White asked．
　　'The monkey's paw， Mrs White said．'Where is it？'
　　'It's downstairs， Mr White answered．'Why？'
　　Mrs White began to laugh and cry．'We can have two more wishes！ 'she cried． 'We had one—but there are two more！'
　　'Oh，no！Not again！ Think， woman！' Mr White cried． But Mrs White did not listen．
　　'Quickly，' she said ．'Go and get the paw． We're going to wish for our boy to come back to us！'
　　'No！' Mr White cried．'You're mad！'
　　'Get it！ Get it quickly！' Mrs White cried again．
　　Mr White said again，'Think， woman！ Think！ Our boy was in the machinery for a long time． They didn't want to show him to us！ Think！Do you want to see his body？'
　　'Yes！ He's my son． I'm not afraid of him！' she answered．
　　'You don't understand，' Mr White said sadly， but he went downstairs to look for the monkey's paw．
　　In the living-room it was dark and Mr White did not have a candle． Slowly， he went across the room and he put out his hand for the monkey's paw． He touched it， and quickly took his hand away again．
　　'No！' he thought．'I can't！I don't want to see Herbert！ His face—after he was in the machinery… no！'
　　Then he thought about his wife—and he put out his hand and took the paw．
　　In the bedroom his wife waited． She saw the paw in Mr White's hand and cried，'Quick！ Make the wish！'
　　'I can't，'Mr White answered． 'Remember—he died in the machinery！'
　　'Make the wish！ I'm not afraid of my own son！'Mrs White cried again．
　　Mr White looked sadly at his wife， but he took the paw in his right hand and said slowly，'I wish for my son， Herbert， to come back to us．'then he sat down in the nearest chair．
　　But Mrs White went over to the window and looked out into the road． She stayed there for a long time and she did not move． Nothing happened． The monkey's paw could not do it！
　　'Thank God！'Mr White said，and he went back to bed．
　　Soon Mrs White went to bed too．



■ 6



■ Chapter 7
　　But they did not sleep． They waited and they listened． In the end Mr White got up to get a candle because the dark made him more afraid． He began to go downstairs， but suddenly he heard a noise at the front door．He stopped，and he listened. He could not move．Then the noise came again． This time he ran．He ran upstairs，back into the bedroom and he closed the door behind him． But again the noise came．
　　'What's that？' Mrs White cried， and she sat up in bed．
　　'Nothing！ GO to sleep again！' her husband answered．
　　But Mrs White listened—and the noise came again．'It's Herbert！ It's Herbert！ she cried．'I'm going to open the door for him．'
　　And she got out of bed and ran to the door of the bedroom．Mr White got there first and stopped her．
　　'No！' he cried．'Think！'
　　'But it's my boy！ It's Herbert，' she answered．
　　'No！Don't go！Don't…'her husband cried again．
　　But Mrs White did not listen to him． She opened the bed room door and ran from the room．'I'm coming， Herbert． I'm coming！' she called．
　　Mr White ran after her．'Stop！'he cried．'Remember， Herbert died in the machinery！You don't want to see him！'
　　For a minute Mrs White stopped and looked at her husband， but then the noise came again and she began to run downstairs．
　　'Help me！ Help me！' she called to her husband．
　　But Mr White did not move．'The paw！' he thought．'Where's the monkey's paw？'
　　He ran back into the bedroom．'Quick！'he thought． 'Where is it？'At first he could not find it in the dark．Ah！ There it was！ He had it！
　　Just at that minute he heard his wife downstairs．
　　'Wait！ Wait， Herbert！ I'm coming！' she cried． She began to open the front door．
　　At the same time Mr White took the monkey's paw in his right hand and he made his third wish．
　　Mrs White gave a long unhappy cry and her husband ran down to her． She stood by the open door． Very afraid，Old Mr White looked out into the dark．
　　The road was dark and quiet—and there was nobody there．



■ 7

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Elephant Man by Tim Vicary





■ Chapter 1 The Creature in the Shop
　　My name is Dr Frederick Treves. I am a doctor at the London Hospital. One day in 1884, I saw a picture in the window of a shop near the hospital. I stopped in front of the shop and looked at the picture. At first I felt interested, then I felt angry, then afraid. It was a horrible, ugly picture. There was a man in the picture, but he did not look like you and me. He did not look like a man. He looked like an elephant.
　　I read the writing under the picture. It said：
　　Come in and see the Elephant Man. 2 pence. I opened the door and went in.
　　There was a man in the shop. He was a dirty man in an old coat with a cigarette in his mouth. 'What do you want？'he asked.
　　'I'd like to see the elephant man, please, 'I said.
　　The man looked at me angrily. 'Well, you can't, ' he said. 'The shop's closing now. You can come back tomorrow. '
　　'I'm sorry, 'I said. ' But I would like to see him now. I have no time tomorrow—I have a lot of work to do. But I can give you more than 2 pence. '
　　The man looked at me carefully. Then he took the cigarette out of his mouth and smiled with his yellow teeth.
　　'All right, sir, 'he said. 'Give me twelve pence then. '
　　I gave him the money and he opened a door at the back of the shop. We went into a little room. The room was cold and dark, and there was a horrible smell in it.
　　A creature sat on a chair behind a table. I say a creature, because it was not a man or a woman, like you or me. The creature did not move or look at us. It sat very quietly on the chair in the cold, dark, dirty room, and looked at the table. The creature had a cloth over its head, because of the cold. On the table in front of it, there was a dead flower.
　　'Stand up! 'said the shopkeeper, loudly.
　　The creature stood up slowly. It took the old cloth off its head, and put it on the chair.
　　I looked at the creature and felt sad. I am a doctor, so I know a lot about accidents and ill people. I see horrible, ugly things every day. But this creature, this thing, was the worst of all. There were no men or women in the hospital like him.
　　He wore some old trousers, but no shirt, coat, or shoes, so I could see his body very well. His head was the most interesting thing. It was very, very big—like an enormous bag with a lot of books in it. The head did not have much hair, and there was another bag of brown, dirty skin at the back of it. This skin came down below his neck. I could not see one of his eyes very well, because a lot of skin came down in front of his face, too.
　　An enormous red tooth came out of his mouth, under his nose. It looked like an elephant's tooth. The mouth and nose were like holes in the face. The face could not smile or laugh or look angry or sad, because the skin could not move. It was dead, like an elephant's face.
　　There were more bags of dirty skin on the front and back of the creature's body. These bags came down to his legs. The right arm was enormous, and there were bags of skin on it, too. The right hand was like a man's foot.
　　But the left hand the left arm and the left hand were beautiful! The left arm had wonderful skin, and the fingers of the left hand were long and beautiful. It was like a young woman's hand!
　　'Walk, Merrick! ' said the shopkeeper angrily. 'Come on, quickly, move! 'He hit the creature with his hand.
　　Slowly, the creature walked across the room. But he could not walk well. His legs were very big and fat, and he had a bad back. He could not walk far without a stick.
　　'All right, thank you, 'I said. 'Let him sit down. I don't want to see any more. 'I felt ill, and the smell in the room was very bad.
　　'Yes, sir, 'said the shopkeeper. 'Sit down, Merrick. '
　　We went out of the room and closed the door. The shop－keeper smiled at me with his yellow teeth.
　　'Wonderful, sir, isn't it？'he said. 'The best Elephant Man in England! Hundreds of people come to see him, you know, hundreds! I take him all over the country, I do! '
　　'Yes, very interesting, 'I said. 'Can I sit down？'
　　'Yes, sir, of course. Here's a chair. 'He looked at me, smiling. 'Would you like a glass of water, sir？'
　　'Yes, please, 'I said. Then I looked at the things in the dirty shop. There were two or three bad apples and some old black bananas：that was all. 'Er, no…no, thank you. I'm all right, 'I said. 'Did you…did you call the creature Merrick？'
　　'That's right, sir. Joseph Merrick. The best ElephantMan in England! I take him all over the country, you know. Lots of people want to see him. '
　　'Yes, I see. Do you get a lot of money？'
　　'Well, sometimes we do, sir, yes. But it's difficult, you see, sir, because of the police. The police don't like us, you see, sir. So we can't stay in a town very long. We usually move every week. '
　　'Yes, I see. Well, anyway, Mr…er？'
　　'Silcock, sir. Simon Silcock. '
　　'Yes, well, Mr Silcock, I'm a doctor at the London Hospital. My name is Dr Treves. I think this…er… this man Joseph Merrick is very interesting, and I would like to see him at the hospital. I want to look at him more carefully, you see.
　　'Yes sir, I see. But how can he get to the hospital？It's going to be difficult. '
　　'Why, man？ The hospital's not far from here. '
　　'Well, yes, sir. I know. But, you see, Merrick can't walk very well. He needs help. '
　　'You can come with him. Do you want more money？Is that it？'
　　'Well, yes, sir, I do. But, you see, people are afraid of him too… In the road, little boys always run after him and hit him. Then the police get angry because people are afraid. Sometimes they take us to prison. '
　　'I see, 'I said. 'Well, how can he come to the hospital, then？'
　　'Bring a cab, sir, 'said Silcock. 'You can take him to the hospital in a cab. '






■ Chapter 2 The Card
　　So next day, at seven o'clock, I came to the shop in a cab. There were not very many people in the road, be－cause it was early in the morning. In November it is dark at seven o'clock in the morning, and I could not see the shop very well. I waited five minutes. A postman walked past. Then the door of the shop opened, and the creature, Merrick , came out.
　　I could not see his face or his body. He had an enormous black hat on his head, like a big box. A grey cloth came down from the hat, in front of his face. There was a hole in the cloth in front of his eyes. He could see out of the hole but I could not see in. He wore a long black coat, too. The coat began at his neck, and ended at his feet, so I could not see his arms, his body, or his legs. On his feet he wore big shoes, like old bags.
　　He had a stick in his left hand, and he walked very slowly. I opened the door of the cab, and got out.
　　'Good morning, Mr Merrick, 'I said. 'Can you get in？'
　　'Elpmyupasteps, 'he said.
　　'I'm sorry, 'I said. 'I don't understand. '
　　For a minute he stood by the door of the cab and said nothing. Then he hit the cab with his stick.
　　'STEPS! 'he said loudly. 'Help me up the steps! '
　　Then I understood. There were three steps up into the cab, and he could not get up them.
　　'Yes, I see. I'm sorry, 'I said. 'Let me help you. '
　　I took his left hand and began to help him. My right hand was behind his back. I felt very strange. His left hand was like a young woman's, but his back under the coat, was horrible. I could feel the bags of old skin on his back under the coat.
　　He put one enormous foot on the first step, and then he stopped. After a minute, he moved his second foot slowly. Then he stopped and waited again.
　　'Hello, sir. Can I help you？'
　　I looked behind me. It was the postman. And behind him, I could see three young boys. One of the boys laughed.
　　The postman smiled. 'Is the gentleman ill？'he asked.
　　I thought quickly. 'Yes. But this is a lady, not a gentle-man. I'm a doctor, and she's ill. Take her hand, so I can help her better. '
　　The postman took Merrick's left hand, and I helped him with two hands from behind. Slowly, very slowly, Merrick went up the steps and into the cab.
　　One boy was very near the cab. He called to his friends.
　　'Come and see this, boys! A fat lady in a black coat! And look at that enormous hat! '
　　The boys laughed. They were very near the cab too, now. I closed the door quickly.
　　'Thank you, 'I said to the postman.
　　'That's all right, sir, 'he said. 'She's a strange lady, sir, isn't she？'
　　'She's ill, that's all, 'I said quickly. 'We're going to the hospital. Goodbye, and thank you. '
　　The cab drove down the road to the hospital. I locked at Merrick. 'That was difficult, wasn't it？'I said.
　　At first he said nothing, but then he spoke. His voice was very strange, but I listened to him carefully, and I could understand him.
　　'The steps were very difficult, 'he said. 'But most things are difficult for me. '
　　'Yes, 'I said. ' Nothing is easy for you, is it？'
　　'No, 'he said. He was very quiet for a minute. Then he said, 'Who are you, sir？'
　　'Who am I？Oh, I'm sorry, My name is Dr Treves. Here, this is my card. '
　　I gave him a card with my name on. Then I thought, 'That was no good. This man can't read. 'But Merrick took the card and looked at it very carefully. Then he put it in his trousers pocket.
　　I did not talk to him very much at the hospital. I looked at his head and arms and legs and body very carefully. Then I wrote the important things about him in a little book. A nurse helped me. Merrick looked at her sometimes, but she did not smile at him or talk to him. I think she was afraid of him. I think Merrick was afraid too, because he was very quiet.
　　At four o'clock I took him back to the shop in a cab. The next day I looked in the shop window again, but the picture was not there.






■ Chapter 3 A Letter to'The Times'
　　I did not see Merrick again for two years. Then, one day, the police found him. He had my card in his hand, so they brought him to the London Hospital. He was very tired, hungry, and dirty, so I put him to bed in a quiet little room. But he could not stay at the hospital. He was not ill, and of course the beds in the hospital are for ill people. We have no beds for hungry people, or ugly people.
　　I told the Hospital Chairman, Mr Cars Gomm, about Merrick. He listened carefully, and then he wrote a letter to the editor of The Times newspaper.
　　From The Times, December 4th, 1886
　　A Letter to the Editor.
　　Dear Sir,
　　I am writing to you about a man in our hospital. He needs your help. His name is Joseph Merrick, and he is 27 years old. He is not ill, but he cannot go out of the hospital because he is very, very ugly. Nobody likes to look at him, and some people are afraid him. We call him 'The Elephant Man'.
　　Two years ago, Merrick lived in a shop near the London Hospital. For two pence, people could see him and laugh at him. One day Dr Frederick Treves—a hospital doctor——sawMerrick, brought him to this hospital, and looked at him carefully. Dr Treves could not help Merrick, but he gave him his card.
　　Then the shopkeeper, Silcock, took merrick to Belgium. A lot of people in Belgium wanted to see him, and so after a year Merrick had ￡50. But then Silcock took Merrick's ￡50, left Merrick in Belgium, and went back to London.
　　Merrick came back to London by himself. Everyone on the train and the ship looked at him, and laughed at him. In London, the police put him in prison. But then they saw DrTreves's card, and brought Merrick to the London Hospital.
　　This man has no money, and he cannot work. His face and body are very, very ugly, so of course many people are afraid of him. But he is a very interesting man. He can read and write, and he thinks a lot. He is a good, quiet man. Sometimes he makes things with his hands and gives them to the nurses, because they are kind to him.
　　He remembers his mother, and he has a picture of her. She was beautiful and kind, he says. But he never sees her now. She gave him to Silcock a long time ago.
　　Can the readers of The Times help us？ This man is not ill, but he needs a home. We can give him a room at the hospital, but we need some money. Please write to me at the London Hospital.
　　Yours faithfully,
　　F. C. Carr Gomm.
　　Chairman of the London Hospital
　　The readers of The Times are very kind people. They gave us a lot of money. After one week, we had ￡50, 000, so Merrick could live in the Hospital for all his life. We could give him a home.






■ Chapter 4 Merrick's First Home
　　We gave Merrick two rooms at the back of the hospital. One room was a bathroom, so he could have a bath every day. Soon his skin was much better, and there was no horrible smell.
　　The second room had a bed, table , and chairs. I visited him every day, and talked to him. He loved reading, and talking about books. At first he did not know many books：the Bible, and one or two newspapers, that's all. But I gave him some books of love stories, and he liked them very much. He read them again and again, and talked about them often. For him, the men and women in these books were alive, like you and me. He was very happy.
　　But sometimes it was difficult for him. At first, one or two people in the hospital laughed at Merrick because he was ugly. Sometimes, they brought their friends to look at him. One day a new nurse came to the hospital, and nobody told her about Merrick. She took his food to his room, and opened the door. Then she saw him. She screamed, dropped the food on the floor, and ran out of the room.
　　I was very angry with the nurse, and went to see Merrick. He was not happy about it, but he was not very angry. I think he felt sorry for the girl.
　　'People don't like looking at me. I know that, Dr 26Treves, 'he said. 'They usually laugh or scream. '
　　'Well, I don't want nurses to laugh at you, Joseph, ' I said angrily. 'I want them to help you. '
　　'Thank you, doctor, 'he said, in his strange slow voice. 'But it's not important. Everyone laughs at me. I understand that. '
　　I looked at him sadly. In his one good hand, his left hand, he had the little picture of his mother. He looked at the picture for a minute, and then put it by a flower on the table. A tear ran out of his eye and down the skin of his enormous, ugly face.
　　'Dr Treves, 'he said, slowly. 'You and the nurses arevery kind, and I'm very happy here. Thank you very much. But…I know I can't stay here long, and…I would like to live in a lighthouse, after the hospital, please. A lighthouse, or a home for blind people. I think those are the best places for me.
　　'What do you mean？'I ashed. 'Why？'
　　He did not look at me. He put the flower on the picture and looked at it carefully.
　　'Lighthouses have sea all round them, don't they？ 'he said. ' Nobody could look at me in a lighthouse, so I would be happy there. And blind people can see nothing, so they couldn't see me, could they？'
　　'But Joseph, 'I said. 'This is your home. You live here now. You aren't going to leave the hospital. ' 28'Not todsy, perhaps, 'he said. But soon. You are a kind man, Dr Treves. But I can't stay here very long. I have no money. '
　　I smiled. 'Joseph, I said. 'This is your home now. Don't you understand？You can stay here all your life. ' Very carefully, I told him about the letter to The Times, and the money.
　　I don't think he understood at first, so I told him again. He was very quiet for a minute. Then he stood up, and walked up and down the room very quickly. A strange sound came from him, like laughing.






■ Chapter 5 An Important Visitor
　　I did not want Merrick to live by himself, like a man in a lighthouse. He read his books, and talked to me, but I wanted him to talk to more people. And I wanted him to talk to women.
　　Merrick read about women in his books, but he did not often talk to women. He met the nurses every day, but they did not talk to him very much. For them, he was always a creature, not a man.
　　One day, one of my friends, a beautiful young woman, came to the hospital. I told her about Merrick, and took her to his room. She opened the door, and smiled at him.
　　'Good morning, Mr Merrick, 'she said. Then she shook his hand.
　　Merrick looked at her for a minute with his mouth open. Then he sat down on his bed, with his head in his hand, and cried. He cried for nearly five minutes. The tears ran down his face, between his fingers, and onto the floor.
　　My friend sat on the bed beside him and put her hand on his arm. She said nothing, but she smiled at him and shookhis hand again before she left.
　　'Dr Treves, 'he said to me that night. 'That lady was wonderful! My mother smiled at me once, many years ago, but no women smile at me now. But this lady smiled at me too, and she shook my hand! A beautiful lady smiled at me and shook my hand! '
　　My young lady friend came again the next week, and talked to Merrick for half an hour. The week after that, she came again with a friend. They gave him some books, and had a cup of tea with him. It was wonderful for him. For the first time in his life, he had some friends. He was a very happy man. He sat in his room, and read his books, and said no more about living on a lighthouse.
　　People began to read about Merrick in the newspapers, sohe had a lot of visitors. Everybody wanted to see him. A lot of important ladies and gentlemen visited him. They smiled at him, shook his hand, and gave him books. Merrick liked talk-ing to these people, and he began to forget about his uglybody. His visitors never laughed at him. He began to feel like a man, not a creature.
　　One wonderful day, a very important lady came to the hospital to visit him. I met the lady, and took her to his room. Then I opened the door, and smiled at him.
　　'Good morning, Joseph, 'I said. 'There is a new visitor to see you today. A very famous lady. '
　　Merrick stood up beside his table. He did not smile, because his face could not smile, but his eyes looked happy.
　　'That's good, 'he said. 'Who is it？'
　　I moved away from the door, and the visitor walked in. 'Your Majesty, this is Joseph Merrick, 'I said. 'Joseph, this is Her Majesty, Queen Alexandra, the Queen of England. '
　　Queen Alexandra smiled at him. 'How do you do, Mr Merrick, 'She said. 'I'm very pleased to meet you. 'Then she shook his hand.
　　Merrick did not move. For nearly half a minute he stood and looked at her with his mouth open. Then he spoke, in his strange, slow voice.
　　'How… how do you do, Your Majesty, 'he said. But I don't think the Queen understood him, because he tried to get down on his knees at the same time. It was very difficult for him, because of his enormous legs.
　　'No, please, Mr Merrick, do get up, 'said the Queen. 'I would like to talk to you. Can we sit at your table？'
　　'Yes…yes, of course, 'he said. They sat at the table. She took his left hand, the good hand, in hers. She looked at the hand carefully, and then smiled at Merrick again.
　　'I often read about you in the newspapers, 'she said. 'You are a very interesting man, Mr Merrick. You have a very difficult life, but people say you're happy. Is it true？ Are you happy now？'
　　'Oh, yes, Your Majesty, yes! 'said Merrick. 'I'm a very happy man! I have a home here now, and friends, and my books. I'm happy every hour of the day! '
　　'What a wonderful story! 'she said. 'I'm very pleasedto hear it Now, tell me about your reading. I see you have a lot of books here. '
　　'Oh, yes, Your Majesty. I love my books, 'said Merrick. And for nearly half an hour they sat and talked about books. The Queen gave him a little book, and some red flowers, before she left.
　　After her visit, Merrick began to sing. He could not sing easily, of course, because of his mouth, but all that day there was a strange, happy noise in his room. He looked at the flowers carefully, and put them on his table.
　　He had many visits from the Queen, and at Christmas she sent him a Christmas card.
　　Windsor Castle
　　20th December 1888
　　Dear Joseph,
　　Here is a small Christmas present for you. I think it looks like me, doesn't it？I do like visiting you very much, and I am going to come to the hospital again in the New Year.
　　Happy Christmas!
　　Your friend
　　Alexandra
　　The present was a picture of Queen Alexandra, with her name on it. Merrick cried over it, and put it carefully by the bed in his room. Then he sat down and wrote a letter to the Queen. It was the first letter of his life.
　　The London Hospital
　　23rd December 1888
　　My dear Queen,
　　Thank you very, very, much for your wonderful card and the beautiful picture. It is the best thing in my room, the very best, the most beautiful thing I have. This is the first Christmas in my life, and my first Christmas present. Perhaps I had a Christmas with my mother once, but I do not remember it. I have my mother's picture too, and she is beautiful, like you. But now I know many famous ladies and kind people like Dr Treves, and I am a very happy man. I am happy too because I am going to see you in the New Year.
　　Happy Christmas to you, my dear friend,
　　With all my love,
　　Joseph Merrick






■ Chapter 6 Outside the Hospital
　　Merrick had a lo of friends now, but he was more like a child than a man. He could read about things, and talk to his visitors, but he could not go out of the hospital by himself. He thought and played like a child.
　　After Christmas, he wanted to go to the theatre. This was very difficult, because I did not want the people in the theatre to see him. But a kind lady from the theatre—Mrs Kendal—helped us. We bought tickets for a box at the side of the theatre We went to the theatre in a cab with dark windows, and we went into the theatre by a door at the back—the Queen's door. Nobody saw us.
　　Three nurses sat at the front of the box, and Merrick and I sat in the dark behind them. Nobody in the theatre could see us, but we could see the play.
　　It was a children's Christmas play. Merrick loved it. It was a most wonderful, exciting story. Often he laughed, and sometimes he tried to sing like the children in the theatre. He was like a child. For him, everything in the story was true.
　　Once he was very afraid, because the bad man in the play was angry and had a knife. At first Merrick wanted to leave the theatre, but I stopped him. Then he was very angry with this bad man in the play. He hit his hand on his chair, and stood up and talked to the man. But nobody heard him. When 42the bad man went to prison, Merrick laughed.
　　Merrick thought the beautiful young lady in the play was wonderful. He wanted to talk to her too. At the end of the play he was very happy because she married a good young man.
　　He remembered this play for a long time, and he talked a lot about the people in it. 'What do you think they did after we left？'he asked me. 'Where do the young lady and the young man live？ What are they doing now？'
　　'I don't know, I said. 'Perhaps they live in the country. '
　　Merrick thought about this for a long time. Then he said：'Dr Treves, can I go to the country, please？I saw the country once from a train, but I never went there. I often read about it in books. It's very beautiful, isn't it？I would like to see it. '
　　The visit to the theatre was difficult but a visit to the country was more difficult. But again, one of his new friends helped us. She had a small house in the country, and Merrick could stay in it for the summer, she said.
　　I took Merrick to the country in a train with dark windows, so nobody could see him. Then we went in a cab to the country house.
　　There were a lot of trees near the house, but no people lived near it. A countryman brought food to the house everyday, but no people came near it.
　　I stayed with him that night. At night, it was very dark 44and quiet. In the morning, hundreds of birds sang in the trees, and everything outside the house was green. Merrick walked under the big trees, looking at things happily, and singing his strange song.
　　I went back to London, but Merrick stayed there for six weeks. He was wonderfully happy. Every week, he wrote me a letter.
　　Apple Tree House,
　　West Wickham,
　　Berkshire.
　　21st July 1889
　　Dear Dr Treves,
　　I had a wonderful day again today, It was very warm, so I walked under the trees and sat by a stream. The water in the stream made a beautiful noise, like singing. Did you know that？I listened to it for two hours.
　　Lots of little birds came near me . One had a red body in front, and a brown back. I gave it some bread, and it sat on my hand. A lot of birds are my friends, now.
　　I watched the fish in the stream, too. They were very exciting, because they move very fast. One minute they were there, and the next minute I couldn't see them. But I waited quietly, and they always came back. I put my hand in the water, but I couldn't touch them.
　　I met a big dog yesterday. It made a very loud noise, but I was not afraid. I sat down quietly and looked it, and it came and smelt my hand. I saw it again today, and gave it some bread. It likes me now.
　　I am going to put some flowers from the country in this letter. There are hundreds of flowers here. Did you know that？I like the little blue ones best, but they are all beautiful. I have lots of them in my room. I give them water every morning. Little flowers are very thirsty, you know!
　　I am very happy here, doctor, but I want to see you again soon, too.
　　With love from your friend,
　　Joseph Merrick
　　At the end of the summer he came back to London. He was very well, and his skin looked much better. He talked about the country a lot, but he was happy to see his friends and his books again, too.






■ Chapter 7 The Last Letter
　　Six months later, in April 1890, I found him dead inbed. He was on his back in bed, so at first I thought he was asleep. I talked to him, but he did not move. Then I saw that the skin on his face was blue, so I knew he was dead.
　　He did not usually sleep on his back. His enormous head was very heavy, so he usually sat up in bed with his arms round his legs, and his head on his knees. He could sleep well like this.
　　But he wanted to sleep on his back like you and me. Hetried to sleep on his back that night, but his heavy head came off the bed, and he broke his neck. He died very quickly.
　　Next day, the Chairman of the London Hospital, Mr Carr Gomm, wrote to the editor of The Times again.
　　The Times, April 16th, 1890
　　Dear Sir,
　　Three and a half years ago I wrote to you about a man called Joseph Merrick. This man was called'The Elephant Man' because he aws born with a very ugly body. Merrick was not ill, but he could not work, and he had no money.
　　The readers of The Times felt sorry for him, and they gave me a lot of money for Merrick. Because of this money, we could giveMerrick a home in the Lon-don Hospital. It was his first good home, and for three and a half years he lived here happily. The doctors and nurses of the hospital helped him, and many important people visited him. He read many books, he went to the the atre, and in the summer he stayed in the country for six weeks. Because of your readers' money, we couldgive him a happy life.
　　Last night Joseph Merrick died quietly in his bed. He was a man with a very ugly body, but he was a good, kind man, and he had a lot of friends. We liked to talk to him, and we are all very sorry because he is dead. A lot of people are going to remember him for a longtime.
　　There is some money left, so I am going to give it to the hospital. Thank you, sir, for your help.
　　Yours faithfully
　　F. C. Carr Gomm
　　Chairman of The London
　　Hospital




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Coldest Place On Earth by Tim Vicary





■ Chapter 1 Two Ships
　　The race began in the summer of 1910．
　　On June lst，in London，a black ship，the Terra Nova， went down the river Thames to the sea．Thousands of people stood by the river to watch it．They were all excited and happy．
　　On the Terra Nova，Captain Robert Falcon Scott smiled quietly．It was a very important day for him．He was a strong man，not very tall，in the blue clothes of a captain．He was forty-one years old，but he had a young face，like a boy．His eyes were dark and quiet．
　　One man on the ship，Titus Oates，smiled at Scott．
　　'What an exciting day，Captain！'he said．'Look at those people！I feel like an important man！'
　　Scott laughed．'You are important，Titus，'he said．'And you're going to be famous，too．We all are．Do you see this flag？'He looked at the big British flag at the back of the ship，and smiled at Oates．'That flag is coming with us，'he said．
　　'In the Antarctic，I'm going to carry it under my clothes． We're going to be the first men at the South Pole，and that flag is going to be first，too！'
　　* * * * *
　　Five days later，on June 6th，a man opened the door of his wooden house in Norway．He was a tall man，with a long face．He waited outside the house for a minute．Everything was very quiet．He could see no houses，only mountains，trees，and wa-ter．It was nearly dark．The sky was black over the mountains．
　　The man smiled，and walked quickly away from the house，down to the sea．In the water，a big wooden ship waited for him．The man got onto the ship，and talked and laughed quietly with his friends．
　　The ship's name was Fram，and the man was Roald Amundsen．The Fram was the most beautiful ship on earth，Amundsen thought．His friends were the best skiers on earth，too．One of them，Olav Bjaaland，smiled at him．
　　'North Pole，here we come，Captain，'he said．
　　'Yes．'Amundsen said．His friends could not see his face in the dark．'Fram is going to the Arctic．'
　　Everyone on the Fram was ready to go to the North Pole，to the Arctic．Amundsen wanted to go there，too．But first he wanted to go south．His friends didn't know that．
　　At midnight on June 6th，the Fram moved quietly away from Amundsen's house，out to sea．



　　* * * * *



■ Chapter 2 The Race
　　The Fram went to an island in the south of Norway．It was a very little island，with only one small wooden house，two trees—and nearly a hundred dogs．
　　'Look at that！'Bjaaland said．'It's an island of dogs！There are dogs in the water，near the trees，on the house—dogs everywhere！'
　　Two men came out of the house．'Hassel！Lindstrom！'Amundsen said．'It's good to see you！How many dogs do you have for me？'
　　'Ninety-nine，Roald，'said Hassel．'The best ninety-nine dogs from Greenland．And they're very happy！They don't work；they just eat and play all day！They're having a won-derful summer here！'
　　'Good，good．'Amundsen laughed．'But that's finished now．Hey，Bjaaland！Stop laughing—come down here and help me．Let's get all these dogs onto the ship！'
　　It was not easy．The dogs were fat and strong，and they didn't want to go on the ship．But at last，after three hours'hard work，all ninety-nine were on the ship，and the Fram went out to sea again．
　　The men were not happy．The weather was bad，the dogs were dirty，and some of the men were ill．They began to ask questions．
　　'Why are we bringing dogs witn us？'asked one man，Jo- hansen．'We're going thousands of kilometres south，past Cape Horn，and then north to Alaska．Why not wait，and get dogs in Alaska？'
　　'Don't ask me，'said his friend，Helmer Hanssen，'I don't understand it．'
　　The men talked for a long time．Then，on September 9th， Amundsen called everyone to the back of the ship．He stood quietly and looked at them．Behind him was a big map．It was not a map of the Arctic．It was a map of Antarctica．
　　Bjaaland looked at Helmer Hanssen，and laughed．Then Amundsen began to speak．
　　'Boys，'he said．'I know you are unhappy．You often ask me difficult questions，and I don't answer．Well，I'm going to an-swer all those questions now，today．
　　We began to work for this journey two years ago．Then，we wanted to be the first men at the North Pole．But last year，Peary，an American，found the North Pole．So America was first to the North Pole，not Norway．We're going there，but we're too late．'
　　'I don't understand this，'Bjaaland thought．'Why is Amundsen talking about the North Pole，with a map of Antarctica behind him？'
　　Amundsen stopped for a minute，and looked at all the men slowly．No one said anything．
　　'We have to go a long way south before we get to Alaska，'he said．'Very near Antarctica，you know．And Captain Scott，the Englishman，is going to the South Pole this year．He wants to put his British flag there．An American flag at the North Pole，a British flag at the South Pole．'
　　Bjaaland began to understand．He started to smile and couldn't stop．He was warm and excited．
　　'Well，boys，'Amundsen said slowly．'Do we want the British to put their flag at the South Pole first？How fast can we travel？We have a lot of dogs，and some of the most won-derful skiers on earth—Bjaaland here is the best in Norway！So I have an idea，boys．Let's go to the South Pole，and put the Norwegian flag there before the British！What do you say？'
　　For a minute or two it was very quiet．Amundsen waited，and the men watched him and thought．Then Bjaaland
　　laughed．
　　'Yes！'he said．'Why not？It's a ski race，isn't it，and the English can't ski！It's a wonderful idea，of course！Let's go！'






■ Chapter 3 The Ponies
　　On October 27th，the Terra Nova arrived in Wellington，New Zealand．When Scott came off the ship，a newspa-per man walked up to him．
　　'Captain Scott！Captain Scott！Can I talk to you，please！'he said．
　　Scott stopped and smiled．'Yes，of course，'he said．'What do you want to know？'
　　'Are you going to win？'the man asked．
　　'Win？'Scott asked．'Win what？'
　　'Win the race to the South Pole，of course，'the newspaper man said．'It's a race between you and Amundsen，now．Look at this！'He gave a newspaper to Scott．Scott looked at it．It said：Scott's face went white．'Give me that！'he said．He took the newspaper and read it carefully．The newspaper man watched him，and waited．'Well，Captain Scott，'he said at last．'Who's going to win this race？Tell me that！'
　　Scott looked at him angrily．'This is stupid！'he said．'It's not a race！I came here to learn about the Antarctic—I'm not interested in Amundsen，or in races！'Then he walked back on-to his ship，with the newspaper in his hand．
　　Later that day，he talked to his men．He gave them the newspaper，and laughed．
　　'It doesn't matter，'he said．'We're in front of Amundsen，and we have more men，and more money．He has only eight men，and a lot of dogs．I know about dogs—they don't work in the Antarctic．We have sixteen men and the new motor sledges—they are much better．And tomorrow the ponies are coming．We need ponies，motor sledges，and good strong British men—that's all．Forget about Amundsen！He's not important！'
　　Scott asked Oates to look after the ponies，but he did not let Oates buy them．When Oates first saw the ponies，in New Zealand，he was very unhappy．Most of the ponies were old，and some of them were ill．
　　'They're beautiful ponies，Titus，'Scott said．'They come from China—they're wonderful ponies！'
　　Oates looked at them angrily，and said nothing．Then he asked：'Where is their food，Captain？'
　　'Here！'Scott opened a door．
　　Oates looked inside．He thought for a minute．'We need more food than this，Captain Scott！These ponies are going to work in the coldest place on earth—they need a lot of food—more than this！'
　　Scott smiled quietly．'We can't take more food on this ship，Titus．Where can we put it？But it doesn't matter，old boy．They're very strong ponies，you know．The best ponies on earth．'
　　Later that night，Oates wrote a letter to his mother．There are nineteen ponies on the Terra Nova now，he wrote．All the penies are in a small room at the front of the ship．We eat our food in the room under the ponies，so our table is often wet and dirty．Scott makes a lot of mistakes，I think，and Antarc-tica is a very dangerous place．






■ Chapter 4 Food Depots
　　The two ships，Terra Nova and fram，arrived in Antarctica，in January 1911，at the end of summer．The Englishmen and the Norwegians wanted to stay on the ice all winter．They wanted to be ready to go to the South Pole at the beglnning of the next Antarctic summer．
　　The dogs pulled the Norwegians'sledges．They ran quickly over the snow and pulled the big sledges from the ship onto the ice．The men ran beside them on skis．
　　They put a big wooden house on the ice．The house was full of food，and skis，and sledges．They called it Framheim．Out-side the house，the dogs lived in holes under the snow．When the house was ready，the men made their first journey south．
　　Before the winter，they wanted to take a lot of food south，and leave it in depots．For the long journey to the Pole，they needed a lot of food，and they couldn't carry it all with them．On February 10th，five men，three sledges，eighteen dogs，and half a tonne of food left Framheim and went south．
　　It was easy．The weather was warm for the Antarctic，be-tween—7°Centigrade and—17°Centigrade．The snow was good，and the dogs and skis went fast．They went fifty or sixty kilometres every day．After four days they reached 80°South，and made the first depot．
　　Amundsen made his depot very carefully．It was very im-portant to find it again，next summer．So he put a big black flag on top．Then he put ten flags to the east of the depot—each flag half a kilometre from the next—and ten flags to the west．So there were flags for five kilometres to the left of the depot，and five kilometres to the right．
　　Then they went back to Framheim，and took some more food south，this time to 82°South．
　　This time it was harder．The temperature was sometimes －40°Centigrade，and there were strong winds with a lot of snow．The dogs and men were very tired，and the tents and boots were bad．At the second depot，they put out sixty flags，to help them find it again．
　　They came back to Framheim on March 23rd．It was nearly winter in the Antarctic．Their ship Fram was far away now，near South America．They were alone on the ice．
　　* * * * *
　　Oates went with Scott to make the first British depot．They left Cape Evans on January 25th．There were thirteen men，eight ponies，and twenty-six dogs．The dogs were faster than the ponies—they ran quickly over the top of the snow，but the ponies'feet went through it．Every morning the ponies started first，and the dogs started two hours later，because they ran faster．At night，the dogs made warm holes under the snow，but the ponies stood on top of the snow．It was －20°Centigrade．
　　After fifteen days Oates talked to Scott．There was a strong wind，and the two men's faces were white with snow．
　　'Three of these ponies are ill，Captain，'Oates said．'They can't go on．'
　　'Don't be stupid，Oates，'Scott answered．'They're good strong animals—the best ponies on earth．'
　　'Not these three，'Oates said．'They're ill，and unhappy，and now they can't walk．Let's kill them，and leave the meat here，in the snow．We can eat it，or the dogs can．'
　　'Of course not！'Scott said angrily．'These ponies are our friends，they work hard for us．I don't kill my friends！'
　　Three days later，two of the ponies were dead．
　　Scott's men were slower than Amundsen's；it took them twenty-four days to get to 80°South．They made a big depot there，and put one large black flag on top of it．Then they went back to Cape Evans．
　　Their camp was on an island in the ice，and the sea ice moved sometimes．There were holes in the ice，and black sea water under it．One day seven ponies went through the ice into the sea，and died．One motor sledge also went into the sea．



　　* * * * *



■ Chapter 5 A Long Cold Winter
　　It was dark for four months．Outside the wooden house at Framheim，it was often －60°Centigrade．The dogs lived in warm holes under the snow．The men stayed in the house，and worked in their rooms under the snow．
　　The skis and sledges came from the best shops in Norway，but Bjaaland wasn't happy with them．He changed a lot of things on the skis and sledges．Soon the sledges were stronger than before．The skis were better and faster，too．
　　All the Norwegians worked hard．They looked after their dogs，and worked on their equipment—the sledges，skis，tents．Every day they thought about their journey to the Pole，and talked about it．And every day，Amundsen thought about Scott．One day，in midwinter，he talked to his men．
　　'Let's start early，before Scott，'Amundsen said．'Remem-ber，Scott has more men than us，and he has motor sledges，too．Perhaps they can go faster than us．'
　　Bjaaland laughed．'Oh no，they can't go faster than me，'he said．'On snow，nothing can go faster than a good man on skis．'
　　'We don't know，'Amundsen said．'You're the best skier in Norway，but you get tired，and dogs get tired，too．Motor sledges don't get tired．They can go all day and all night．'
　　Johansen laughed angrily．'That's stupid，'he said．'Perhaps the motor sledges can go all night，but the Englishmen can't．The English can't win，Roald—they don't understand snow，but we do．And they're too slow．'
　　'Perhaps，'Amundsen said．'But I want to win this race．So we're going to start early！Do you understand？'
　　It was quiet and warm inside Framheim．Bjaaland looked at Amundsen，and thought about the long，cold journey in front of him．He thought about the dogs in their holes under the snow，and listened to the wind over the house．'When，Roald？'he said quietly．
　　'On August 24th．The sun comes back on that day．We start then．'
　　'But we can't！'Johansen said．He looked angry，and un-happy．'That's too early！We can't start then—it's danger-ous and stupid！'
　　Amundsen looked at Johansen coldly．'You're wrong，Jo-hansen，'he said．'We want to win，remember？So we start on August 24th．'
　　Bjaaland listened to the winter wind outside．
　　* * * * *
　　In Scott's camp，at Cape Evans，no one talked about Amundsen and no one worked hard．They had good food，and they played football on the snow．They wrote a newspaper—The south Polar Times—and read books．No one learnt to ski，no one worked on the motor sledges．Twice，men went for long jour-neys across the snow．They walked，and pulled the sledges themselves．Oates stayed at Cape Evans and looked after his ponies．
　　Over the window in Cape Evans，Scott put a map of Antarc-tica．With a pen，he made a line from Cape Evans to the South Pole，and he put a little Britisn Flag at the Pole．Under the map，Scott wrote the day for the start of their journey．
　　We start on November 3rd，he wrote．



　　* * * * *



■ Chapter 6 A Bad Start
　　On August 23rd，the Norwegians'sledges were ready．They took them outside，and the dogs pulled them across me ice．The sun came up for half an hour，but it was too cold：－46°Centigrade．They could not travel in that weather．They went back to Framheim and waited．
　　They waited two weeks，until September 8th．Then，with the temperature at－37°Centigrade，they started．They ran happily across the snow to the south—eight men，seven sledges，and eighty-six dogs．Only
　　Lindstrom，the cook，stayed behind in Framheim．
　　At first everything went well．They went twenty-eight kilo-metres on Saturday，and twenty-eight kilometres on Sunday．It was easy．Then，on Monday，the temperature went down—to －56°Centigrade．There was white fog in front of their faces．They couldn't see anything．But they travelled twenty-eight kilometres．
　　That night，in their tents，they nearly died of cold．Next day，they stopped and made snow houses．Inside the snow houses，it was warm．But everyone was unhappy．
　　'I told you，Roald！'Johansen said．'Even September is too early！We can't travel in this cold．Do you want us to die？ Let's go back and wait for better weather．'
　　Amundsen was very angry．He was angry with Johansen，buthe was angry with himself，too．He knew Johansen was right．
　　'All right，'he said slowly．'We can go on to the depot at 80°South，leave the food there，and then go back．We can't do more than that．'
　　It was thirty-seven kilometres to the depot．The wind was in their faces all day．Two dogs died on the way．At the depot，they did not stop．They put out the food and the flags，turned round，and went north．
　　At last the wind was behind them．The dogs ran quickly，and the men sat on the empty sledges．They went faster and faster．It was like a race．Amundsen was on Wisting's sledge，and soon he，Wisting，and Hanssen were three or four kilometres in front．Soon they were alone．They travelled seventy-five kilo-metres in nine hours，and they reached Framheim at four o'clock that afternoon．
　　Bjaaland arrived two hours later，with two more men．But the last two—Johansen and Prestrud—went more slowly．Their dogs were tired，their feet were wet and cold，they had no food，and they were alone in the dark．The temperature was－51°Centigrade．They reached Framheim at midnight．
　　Next morning，Johansen was angry．In front of everyone，he said：'You were wrong，Roald．September was too early．I told you but you didn't listen．And then you left us alone and we nearly died in the cold！You're a bad captain—I'm a better captain than you are！'
　　Amundsen was very angry．But at first he said nothing，be-cause he knew that Johansen was right．Then，that evening，he gave a letter to Johansen．It said：
　　You aren't coming to the Pole with me．When I go south，you can take some dogs and go east to King Edward Ⅶ Land．You can go with Prestrud and Stubberud．You can be the first men to go there—but not to the South Pole！
　　The Norwegians stayed in Framheim and waited．They lay in bed，listened to the wind outside，and thought about Scott and his motor sledges．






■ Chapter 7 Motor Sledges and Mountains
　　Scott had two motor sledges now．They were the first motor sledges in the Antarctic—the first on earth．On October 24th，the motor sledges started south from Cape Evans．Four men went with them，but Scott stayed at Cape Evans for another week．
　　Oates was unhappy．He wrote to his mother：We had a very bad winter here．I don't like Scott．We were here all winter，but he didn't learn to ski，or to drive dogs．Our equipment is bad，and he doesn't think about other people．I'm going to sleep in his tent on the journey，but I don't want to．
　　On November lst Scott and Oates and six more men left Cape Evans with eight sledges and eight ponies．The ponies walked slowly because their feet went down into the snow．It was hard work for them and they got tired very quickly．They travelled thirteen or fourteen kilometres in a day．
　　Behind the ponies came Meares with one sledge and some dogs．Meares knew how to drive dogs．Every day，Meares started two hours after the ponies，and arrived two hours be-fore them．
　　After five days，they found the motor sledges．
　　* * * * *
　　The Norwegians began again on October 20th．There were five men this time—Amundsen，Bjaaland，Wisting，Hassel，and Hanssen．They had four sledges，and forty-eight dogs．
　　There was a lot of wind and fog．On the first day，Wisting's sledge suddenly stopped，and the back went down．'Come on，you dogs！'he said angrily．'Pull！Pull！'At first nothing hap-pened；then，slowly，the sledge moved again．Wisting looked down，over the side of the sledge．Under the snow，there was a fifty metre hole．
　　'Did you see that？'Amundsen said．'The ice wants to eat us —men，dogs，sledges，everything．'
　　On the fourth day they reached the depot at 80°South．There was a bad snowstorm，but they found the flags easily．Next day the men stayed in their tents，and the dogs played in their holes under the snow．They were all happy．They had a lot of food，they had good equipment，and they were warm． They could travel fast．
　　Next morning，the snowstorm stopped，and the journey be-gan again．Today，everything is wonderful，Bjaaland wrote in his diary．But where is Scott？In front of us，or behind？
　　* * * * *
　　There was no one with the motor sledges；they were broken． Scott looked at them angrily．
　　'It doesn't matter，'he said．'Teddy Evans and his men are in front of us．They're good men—they're pulling their sledges themselves．We can get to the Pole on foot．'
　　Oates looked at Meares．Oates and the ponies were tired，but Meares and his dogs were not．The snow was home for them．
　　That night，Oates wrote：Three motor sledges at￡1，000 each，19 ponies at ￡5 each，32 dogs at ￡1．50 each．Well，it's not my money，it's Scott's．
　　On November 21st，one of the ponies died．
　　* * * * *
　　On November 11th，the Norwegians saw the mountains．
　　The mountains were very high—some of the highest on earth．Bjaaland smiled．
　　'There is good skiing up there，Roald，'he said．'But can dogs get up there too？'
　　'Of course they can，'Amundsen said．'Come on．'
　　They left Hanssen with the dogs，and skied a little way up the mountains．It was difficult，but the mountains were big and beautiful．Behind the mountains，Amundsen thought there was a high plateau of ice．'That's it，'Amundsen said．'That's the road to the Pole．Tomorrow，we can bring the dogs and sledges up here．But now，let's have a ski race．Who can get back to camp first？'
　　They laughed，and skied happily down the white snow． 'This is like home，'Bjaaland thought．'But it's bigger than Norway，and better．'
　　In the next four days，the dogs pulled the sledges eighty-one kilometres，and went up 3，000 metres．At last，Amundsen and Bjaaland stood on the plateau behind the mountains．They were tired，happy men．
　　Bjaaland looked back at the mountains．'Can a motor sledge get up here？'he asked．
　　Amundsen smiled．'No，'he said．'I don't think so．And Scott doesn't like dogs．So his men are going to pull their sledges up these mountains themselves．Would you like to do that，Olav？'
　　Bjaaland didn't answer．He smiled，and skied happily away across the snow．



　　* * * * *
　　* * * * *
　　* * * * *



■ Chapter 8 Across the Plateau
　　On November 21st，the Norwegians killed thirty dogs． 'They were happy，'Amundsen said．'And now tney're going to die quickly．We need three sledges，and eighteen dogs， to go to the Pole．'
　　When the dogs were dead，the other dogs ate them．The men ate them，too．They were good friends，Bjaaland wrote in his diary．And now they are good food．Two days later，the dogs were fst．Then，in a snowstorm，they began the journey again．
　　After the snowstorm，there was fog，and in the fog，they got lost on an ice river with hundreds of big holes in it．They could see nothing，and it was very dangerous．In four days they moved nine kilometres．But the ice is beautiful，Bjaaland wrote．Blue and green and white．This is a wonderful place —but I don't want to stay a long time．
　　After the ice，there were strong winds and bad snowstorms．They could see nothing in front of them．But every day，they travelled twenty-five or thirty kilometres．Then，on December 9th，the sun came out．They were at 88°23′South—175 kilo-metres from the Pole．
　　Five more long days，Bjaaland wrote．That's all now．But where is Scott？
　　* * * * *
　　For four days，Scott's men stayed in their tents near the mountains．There is a bad snowstorm outside，Oates wrote．It's too cold for the ponies，and our clothes and skis are bad，too．
　　On December 9th，Oates killed the ponies．They were tired and ill and they could not walk up to the plateau．Then Meares and his dogs went back to Cape Evans．'We can pull the sledges ourselves，'Scott said．'We can do it—we're all strong men．
　　There were two sledges and eight men．They went twenty-four kilometres a day．On December 31st，Scott said to Teddy Evans，and the men on the second sledge：'You can't ski well．Leave your skis here．'So they pulled their sledge twenty-four kilometres without skis．
　　Next day，Scott went to Teddy Evans's tent．'You are ill，Teddy，'he said．'You can't come to the Pole．Take two men and go back，tomorrow．'
　　Teddy Evans was very unhappy．'Two men，Captain？'he said．'Why not three？'
　　'Because Bowers is going to come with me，'Scott said．'He's strong—we need him．'
　　'But…you have food on your sledge for four men，notfive！'Evans said．'And Bowers has no skis！'
　　'I'm the Captain，Teddy！'Scott said．'You do what I say．Take two men and leave Bowers with me！'
　　Oates wrote to his mother：I am going to the Pole with Scott．I am pleased and I fell strong．But in his diary he wrote；My feet are very bad．They are always wet now，and they don't look good．
　　On January 4th Scott's men left Teddy Evans and went on．Scott，Oates，Wilson and Edgar Evans had skis，but Bowers did not．They were 270 kilometres from the Pole．
　　* * * * *
　　December 14th 1911 was a warm，sunny day．Five Norwegians skied over the beautiful white snow．It was very quiet．No one spoke．They were excited，and happy．
　　'Six more kilometres，'Bjaaland thought．Is there a British flag？I can't see a flag，but…
　　'Look！'Hassel said．'What's that over there？'
　　Bjaaland left his sledge and skied quickly away over the snow．'What is it？'he thought．'Is it…？No！'
　　'It's nothing！'he called．'There's nothing there… no-thing！'
　　Three kilometres，two．'Roald！'Hanssen called to Amund-sen．'Go in front of me，please．It helps my dogs．'
　　'That's not true，'Bjaaland thought．'His dogs are running well today．But Hanssen wants Amundsen to be first．The first man at the South Pole！'
　　They skied on and on，over the beautiful snow．
　　'Stop！'Amundsen said．He waited quietly for his men．'This is it，'he said．
　　Bjaaland looked at him．'But there's nothing here，'he said．
　　Amundsen smiled．'Oh yes there is，'he said．'There's something very important here，Olav．Very，very important．'
　　'What's that，Roald？'
　　'Us．We're here now．Isn't that important，Olav？'
　　The four men stood on the snow，and looked at him．Then，slowly，they all began to laugh．



　　* * * * *
　　* * * * *



■ Chapter 9 The End of the Race
　　The Norwegians stayed two days at the Pole．They left a tent there，with a Norwegian flag on it．Inside the tent，they left some food，a letter for the King of Norway，and a let-ter for Scott．
　　They left some more black flags near the Pole，and one twenty-eight kilometres north．Then they skied away，back to the north．
　　It's a beautiful day，Bjaaland wrote．The sun is warm，the snow is good．But the dogs run too quickly—I can't get in front，of them！
　　They found their depots easily．There were ten between the Pole and Framheim．Each depot had a lot of food．They laughed and skied quickly down the mountains．Often，they skied fifty kilometres a day．On Friday，January 26th，1912，they came back to Framheim．It was four o'clock in the morn-ing．
　　Inside the wooden house，Lindstrm，the cook，was asleep．Amundsen walked quietly to his bed．'Good morning，Lindstrm，'he said．'Is our coffee ready？'
　　* * * * *
　　The black flags waited at the Pole．
　　'What's that，Captain？'Bowers said．'Over there？'
　　'Where？'Scott asked．'What—oh my God！'
　　They all saw me small black flag in the snow，two kilome-tres in front of them．Slowly，they pulled their sledge to it．
　　Next day，January 17th 1912，they found the tent and the Norwegian fiag．Near it，Scott took the British flag from under his clothes，and put it up．In his diary，Scott wrote：This is a very bad day．We are all tired，and have cold feet and hands．It is－30°Centigrade and there is a snowstorm．Great God！ This is an awful place！
　　They turned north．Five tired，unhappy men，in the coldest，emptiest place on earth．
　　* * * * *
　　On March 13th，1912，Scott's wife Kathleen，looked at her morning newspaper．NORWAY'S FLAG AT SOUTH POLE，it said．She looked at it for a long time，and then began to cry．
　　'What's the matter？'her friend asked．
　　'My poor，poor husband，'Mrs Scott said．'What's happened to him？Where is he now？'
　　* * * * *
　　Scott's men were always hungry．There were not many depots and they were difficult to find．We need to find the next depot today，Oates wrote．But how can we find one black flag in all this snow？It's very difficult．And there is food for four men，not five．
　　They were all tired and ill，too．Oates's feet were black now，and he could not feel them．On February 16th，Edgar Evans died．
　　On the 17th they were past the mountains．At the depot there they ate one of the dead ponies．Then they went on—ten，eleven，twelve kilometres a day．They were ill because their clothes were not warm and they didn't have much food．The temperature was sometimes －40°Centigrade．
　　On March 7th Scott looked at Oates's feet．They were big and black．'I can't pull the sledge now，'Oates said．'It's very difficult to walk．Am I going to lose these feet，Captain？'
　　Scott looked at Oates's feet，and said nothing．
　　On March 9th they found another depot，but there was not much food．Slowly，they walked on．Oates's feet were worse every day．
　　March 17th was Oates's birthday．He was thirty-two．He lay in the tent and listened to the wind outside．He was very cold，very hungry，and very very tired．
　　He wrote a letter to his mother and gave it to Wilson．Then he got up，and opened the door of the tent．He stopped in the door for a minute．Scott，Wilson，and Bowers looked at him．They didn't speak．
　　'I'm going outside for a minute，'Oates said．'I may be some time．'
　　They didn't see him again．
　　* * * * *
　　At Cape Evans，the Englishmen waited．On December 11th，Meares and the dogs came back．On January 3rd，Teddy Evans and his two men arrived at Cape Evans．The Terra Nova came，and went．Winter began．Scott did not come．
　　The Englishmen waited all winter at Cape Evans．Then，on October 26th 1912，they started for the south．Two weeks later，they found a tent．
　　There were three bodies in the tent—Scott，Wilson，and Bowers．They put the bodies under the snow．Then they took the men's letters and diaries，and went north to Cape Evans again．
　　In Scott's diary they read：Oates died like a good English-man．We all did．Please，remember us，and look after our families．We did our best．
　　No one found Oates's body．But he is there，somewhere， un-der the snow and the wind，in the coldest，emptiest place on earth．



　　* * * * *
　　* * * * *
　　* * * * *
　　* * * * *

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　William Shakespeare by Jannifer Bassett





■ 1 Toby remembers
　　My name is Toby．I'm an old man，eighty-three this spring．My house is right in the middle of Stratford-upon-Avon，and I can watch the street market from my window．But I live very quietly now．I'm just an old man，sitting in a chair．
　　I once knew the greatest man in England．For thirty years I was his friend．I worked with him in the theatre，through the good times and the bad time．He was a good friend to me．He was also the best playwright，the best poet，that ever lived in England．Will Shakespeare was his name．
　　I saw all his plays in the theatre．People loved them．They shouted，laughed and cried，ate oranges，and called for more．All kinds of people．Kings，Queens，Princes，great lords and ladies，poor people，the boys who held the horses…everyone．Will Shakespeare could please them all．
　　He put me in a play once．Well，he used my name-Toby．Twelfth Night was the play，I remember．Sir Toby Belch．He was a big fat man，who liked drinking too much and having a good time．Queen Elizabeth the First watched that play-on Twelfth Night，the 6th of January，1601．She liked it，too．
　　Will's dead now，of course．He's been dead more than thirty years，and no one sees his plays now．The Puritans have closed all the theatres．There's no singing，no dancing，no plays．It wasn't like that in my young days．We had a good time in London，Will and I…
　　I've no teeth now，and my hair has all fallen out，but I can still think—and remember．I remember when Will and I were young，just boys really…






■ 2 Stratford-upon-Avon
　　It was a sunny day in October 1579 when I first met Will，just outside Stratford，near a big field of apple trees．I saw a boy up in one of the trees．He had red hair and looked about two years older than me．
　　‘What are you doing up there？’I called．
　　‘Just getting a few apples，’he said，smiling
　　‘Those are Farmer Nash's apples，I said，‘and he'll send his dogs after you if he sees you．’
　　‘Mr Nash has gone to market，’the boy said．‘Come on！They're good apples．’
　　The next minute I was up the tree with him．But Will was wrong．Farmer Nash wasn't at the market，and a few minutes later we saw his angry red face above the wall on the far side of the field．
　　Will and I ran like the wind and only stopped when we reached the river．We sat down to eat our apples．
　　Will was fifteen，and lived in Henley Street，he told me．His father was John Shakespeare，and he had a sister，Joan，and two younger brothers，Gilbert and Richard．There was another sister who died，I learnt later．And the next year he had another brother，little Edmund—the baby of the family．
　　‘Now，what about you？’he asked．
　　‘There's only me and my sister，’I said．‘My parents are dead，and we live with my mother's brother：He's a shoe-maker in Ely Street and I work for him．What do you do？’
　　‘I go to Mr Jenkins' school in Church Street，’Will said．‘Every day，from seven o'clock until five o'clock．Not Sundays，of course．’
　　I was sorry for him．‘Isn't is boring？’I asked．
　　‘Sometimes．Usually it's all right．’He lay back and put his hands behind his head．‘But we have to read and learn all these Latin writers．I want to read modern writers，and Eng-lish writers，like Geoffrey Chaucer．Can you read？’he asked．
　　‘Of course I can read！’I said．‘I went to school．’
　　Will sat up and began to eat another apple．‘I want to be a writer，’he said．‘A poet．I want that more than anything in the world．’
　　We were friends from that day，until the day he died．We met nearly every day，and he taught me a lot about books and poetry and writers．He always had his nose in a book．
　　When Will left school，he worked for his father in Henley Street．John Shakespeare was a glove-maker，and he had other business too，like buying and selling sheep．But Will wasn't interested．
　　‘What are we going to do，Toby？’he said to me one day．‘We can't spend all our lives making shoes and gloves！’
　　‘Well，’I said，‘we could run away to sea and be sailors．Sail round the world，like Francis Drake．
　　Drake sailed back to Plymouth in 1581，after his three-year journey round the world，but we were still in Stratford．We made lots of plans，but nothing ever came of them．
　　Will was still reading a lot and he was already writing poems himself．He sometimes showed them to me，and I said they were very good．I didn't really know anything about poetry then，but he was my friend．
　　Will was not happy with his writing．‘I've got so much to learn，Toby，’he said．‘So much to learn．’
　　Poor Will．He had a lot to learn about women，too．One day in October 1582 he came to my house with a long face．
　　‘I'll never leave Stratford．’he said．
　　‘Why not？’I asked．‘We'll get away one day．You'll see．’
　　‘Perhaps you will，’he said，‘but I'm going to be married in a few weeks' time．To Anne Hathaway．’
　　My mouth fell open and stayed open．‘Married！To Anne Hathaway？Is that the Hathaways over at Shottery？’
　　‘Yes，’Will said．I was working on some shoes on the table，and Will picked one up and looked at it．
　　‘Well，er，she's a fine girl，of course，’I said uncomfort-ably．‘But…but，Will，she's twenty-six and you're only eighteen！’
　　‘I know，’Will said．‘But I've got to marry her．’
　　‘Oh no！’I said．‘You mean，she's…’
　　‘That's right，’said Will．‘In about six months' time I'm going to be a father．’






■ 3 The actors come to town
　　Will married Anne Hathaway in November，and she came to live in Henley Street．John Shakespeare was pleased that his oldest son was married，but I don't think Will's mother wanted him to marry so young．Families cost a lot of money，and John Shakespeare was having a lot of money troubles in those days．Times were hard in Henley Street．
　　Susanna was born the next May．All babies look the same to me，but Will was very pleased with her．
　　‘Look，Toby，she's got my eyes，’he said happily．‘She's going to be as beautiful as the Queen of Egypt，and as clever as King Solomon．’
　　‘Oh yes？’I said．‘All parents talk like that about their children．I don't believe a word of it．’
　　I didn't see much of Will's wife．I knew she didn't like me．To her，I was one of Will's wild friends，who got him into trouble．She came from a very serious，Puritan family．Lots of church-going，and no singing or dancing．
　　Soon there was another baby on the way，and one evening in February 1585 I hurried round to Henley Street to hear the news．Will's sister，Joan，opened the door，and then Will came running down the stairs．
　　‘It's two of them！’he said．‘Twins！A girl and a boy．Isn't that wonderful！’
　　Will had some good friends，Hamnet and Judith Sadler，and he called the twins after them．John Shakespeare was very pleased to have his first grandson，and everyone was happy．For a while．
　　Will and I still went around together when we could．He was still reading，and writing，and soon I could see a change in him．He was twenty-three now，and he was not happy with his life．
　　‘Stratford's too small，Toby，’he said．‘Too slow．Too quiet．Too boring．I've got to get away．’
　　‘Yes，but how？’I asked．‘You've got a family—three young children，remember．’
　　He didn't answer．
　　In the summer months companies of players often came to small towns，and in 1587 five different companies came．Will and I always went to see the plays．Will loved to talk to the actors and to listen to all their stories of London
　　The Queen's Men came to Stratford in June，and we went to see the play．I don't remember what it was．I know that I laughed a lot，and that Will said it was a stupid play，with not a word of poetry in it．
　　‘Why don't you write a play yourself？’I told him．
　　‘Write a play？’He laughed．‘Anne would never speak to me again．’
　　I didn't say anything，and Will looked at me and laughed again．
　　It happened a few months later．I walked into the Shakespeares' kitchen one evening，and there was Anne，with a red，angry face，shouting at the top of her voice．
　　‘How can you do this to me？And what about the children—’Then she saw me and stopped．
　　Will was sitting at the table，and looked pleased to see me．‘I've told Anne，’he said quietly，‘that I'm going to live in London．I want to be an actor，and to write plays，if I can．’
　　‘Plays！’screamed Anne．‘Acting！Actors are dirty，wicked people！They're all thieves and criminals！They drink all day and they never go to church—’
　　‘Don't be stupid，Anne．You know that's not true．Listen．I'll come home when I can，but I must go to London．I can't do anything in Stratford．’He looked at me across the room．‘Are you coming with me，Toby？’
　　‘How soon can we start？’I said．






■ 4 A new life in London
　　It's two days journey to London by horse，and Will talked all the way．His eyes were bright and excited．He was full of plans，and poems，and a love of life．
　　‘I talked to one of the Queen's Men，’he told me．‘He said that he could find me work in the theatre．Acting，perhaps．Or helping to write some plays．I showed him some of my writing，and he was very interested．
　　When we rode into London，I began to feel afraid．This was a big，big city，and we were just two unimportant young men from a small town．I'll never forget the noise，and the smells，and the crowds．There were 200，000 people living in the City of London—I never saw so many people before in my life．
　　We went down to the river Thames and saw the famous London Bridge，with all its shops and houses．Down the river was the Tower of London．Enemies of the Queen went into the Tower through the river gate，and mostly came out without their heads．
　　We found a small inn in Eastcheap，not too expensive，and had some bread，meat，and beer for our supper．
　　‘Well，we're here！’Will said．‘At last！’
　　‘Mmm，’I said．‘What do we do next？’
　　He laughed．‘Everything！’
　　The next day we began to look for work．
　　Those early years were wonderful．We didn't have much money，of course，and we had to work very hard．A new actor only got six shillings a week，and there wasn't work every week．I decided not to be an actor．
　　‘Why not？’said will．‘It's a great life．’
　　We were working that month for the Queen's Men at the theatre called The Curtain up in Shoreditch．Will was acting four small parts in two different plays．He played a soldier and a murderer in one play，and in the other play he was a thief，and also an Italian lord in love with the Queen of the Night．And he loved it．
　　‘I'm not clever like you，I said．‘I can't remember all those words．I forget who I am！I say the soldier's words，when I'm an Italian lord．I come on stage too late， or too soon．I stand in all the wrong places…’
　　Will laughed．‘What are you going to do，then？’
　　‘Costumes，’I said．‘And properties．I had a talk with John Heminges，and he said they need a new man to help with all the clothes and the other things．’
　　‘Yes，’Will said slowly．‘You'll be good at that．Now，I've got a fight on stage tomorrow，and I have to die with lots of blood．How are you going to get me some blood？’
　　‘I've already got it！I smiled kindly at him．‘Sheep's blood I got it down at Smithfield market this morning．You can have as much blood as you want．I'm keeping it warm for you！’
　　Will was good at acting．Not the best，but good．An actor had to do everything．He had to learn his words，of course—perhaps for six different plays at the same time． No theatre put on the same play every day．He had to dance，and sing，and play music．He had to jump，and fall，and fight．And the fights had to look real．The playgoers of London knew a real fight when they saw one．
　　John Heminges of the Queen's Men taught us both a lot．He was a good friend，then and for many years．
　　I had a lot to learn，too．I learnt how to make shoes out of brown paper．How to clean the actors hats with a bit of bread．Then they looked like new again．I ran all over London to buy the best hair for the wigs．I learnt how to make fish，and fruit，and a piece of meat out of wood and coloured paper．
　　Will was busy day and night．I don't know when he slept．He was acting in plays，he was writing his own plays，he was reading books，he was meeting other writers，making friends…He was learning，learning，learning．
　　One day we were having a glass of beer with Richard Burbage at the Boar's Head in Eastcheap．Burbage was an actor with Lord Strange's Men．He was very friendly with Will．
　　‘You've written four plays now，Will，’he said．‘They're good，and you're getting better all the time．And I'm getting better as an actor all the time．Come and work with Lord Strange's Men at the Rose theatre on Bankside．You can write for us．’
　　So we both went to the Rose．John Heminges came with us，and Augustine Phillips—he was a good actor，too．
　　We worked harder than ever at the Rose．Plays were always in the afternoon，because of the daylight．We had rehearsals in the morning，and by lunch-time people were already coming across the river to get their places for the play．And more and more people came．By 1592 London was hearing the name William Shakespeare again and again．






■ 5 The plague years
　　Will wrote his play Richard Ⅲ for Richard Burbage，and it was a great success．Richard the Third was a wicked king—a murderer－but he was wonderful on the stage，with Burbage's great voice and fine acting．Soon all London was saying King Richard's famous words when his horse is killed in war：
　　A horse！a horse！my kingdom for a horse！
　　All kinds of people came to see plays and Will was making a lot of new friends．One day，after the play，he was talking to a young man outside the Rose．He was a very beautiful young man，a bit like a girl，perhaps—but still very good-looking．Later，I asked Will who he was．
　　‘The Earl of Southampton，Will said．He's only eighteen，but he loves poetry and plays．’
　　‘Isn't he a friend of the Earl of Essex？’I asked．Everybody knew the Earl of Essex．He was young and good-looking—and some people said that Queen Elizabeth was in love with him．
　　I don't know about that．The Queen was fifty-nine years old，and a very，very clever woman．But it was true that she liked to have good-looking young men around her，and the Earl of Essex was her favourite．Then．It all changed later，of course.‘Yes，he is，’said Will．‘But I think Essex is a dangerous man Henry needs better friends than him．’
　　‘Henry，eh？’I said，surprised．‘My word！Do you really call him Henry？Not Lord Suthampton？’
　　‘Only when other people aren't there．’Will laughed．‘I'm still just an actor from Stratford，Toby．Not very important．Let's go and have a drink at the Boar's Head on our way home．’
　　Will was always like that．Quiet，never shouting about himself to the world．
　　In the Boar's Head we met some friends and started talking．The talk was all about the plague，which was coming back again into London．
　　‘Have you heard the latest news？said one man．‘They say that more than thirty people are dying every week now．’
　　‘And the City Council，’said another man，wants to close all the theatres．They always do that when the plague comes to London．There'll be no work for any of us actors．’
　　‘But the players can go on tour，surely？’said Will．
　　‘Yes，’said the first man．‘But it's a hard life．A different town，a different inn，a different play，every night．I think I'll stay in London．’
　　The plague is terrible in any place，but it was worst in London．In those narrow streets，with houses so close together，and the dirty water running down the middle of the street，there was no escape．When the plague came，it ran like fire through the town．If someone in a house got the plague，then the doors were shut and locked，and a big red cross was put on the door．Nobody could leave the house．You had to stay inside and fight—or die．If you were rich，you left London as fast as you could．
　　In September 1592 the City Council closed the theatres．
　　‘Are we going on tour，Will？’I said to him one day．‘Or back to Stratford？We can't stay in London．’
　　‘You go back to Stratford，Toby，’he said slowly．‘I'm going to Lord Southampton's home in Hampshire for a while．He's asked me to go and stay with him．I can do some writing there，read his books，meet a few people．’
　　I looked at him．‘There's a woman in this somewhere，isn't there？You've had a strange look in your eyes for weeks．’
　　Will laughed，but didn't answer my question．
　　The theatres in London didn't open again until June 1594．Will often visited Lord Southampton，but sometimes we went on tour with the company，or spent time at home in Stratford．Will began to spend more time in Stratford，because it was quiet there，and he could do his writing．I never heard what Anne thought about it all．
　　During those years Will wrote a lot of poetry．He wrote his beautiful long poem，Venus and Adonis，for his friend Lord Southampton，and he wrote many of his famous short poems，the Sonnets．But they didn't go in a book；they were only for his friends to read．
　　One day，when we were back in London，I was reading some of his latest sonnets．Will was out somewhere，and I was at home in our lodgings in Bishopsgate．A lot of the poems were about a woman，a terrible，black-haired，black-eyed woman．She was cold and cruel，then she was true and loving，and then she was cruel again．
　　For I have sworn thee fair，and thought thee bright，
　　Who art as black as hell，as dark as night．
　　Was Will writing about himself here？I asked myself．And who was this woman，this Dark Lady？
　　I always like to know what's going on，so I listened，and watched，and looked at all his women friends．
　　Then one day I saw her．I was coming in the door at our lodgings，and she was coming downstairs．She had black hair and great stormy black eyes，and there was gold at her ears and round her neck．I stood back and she went past me like a ship sailing into war．She looked wild，and angry，and very，very beautiful．
　　‘Whew！’I said to myself．‘If that's Will's Dark Lady，he'll never have a quiet，easy life！’
　　The woman looked Italian，so I went and asked John Florio about her．Florio was Lord Southampton's Italian teacher．We saw a lot of him in those days．
　　I described the woman，and he knew her at once．
　　‘Emilia，’he said．‘Emilia Bassano．Now Emilia Lanier，wife to Alphonso Lanier．Before that，she lived with the old Lord Chamberlain．She was not his wife，you understand．But why do you want to know，my friend？’
　　‘If she's a married lady，she doesn't have a lover now，then？’
　　Florio laughed loudly．‘Lovers！You don't know Emilia Lanier！She's a bad woman，my friend，a bad woman．’Now he spoke very quietly．‘For a time she was the friend of Lord Southampton．But not now．That is all finished．’
　　I didn't ask him about Will．Perhaps Emilia Lanier was Will's Dark Lady，or perhaps Will was just trying to help his friend Lord Southampton．Nobody will ever know now．






■ 6 Death in the family
　　After the plague years，we were busy all the time．There were new companies of players and Will now belonged to the Lord Chamberlain's Men．The Lord Chamberlain was a very important man，close to the Queen，and we often put on plays for the Queen's court，and in the houses of the great lords of England．We had some very good actors．There was Will，and Richard Burbage，of course，and John Heminges．And there was Augustine Phillips，Henry Condell，and Thomas Pope．There were other actors，too，but those six were the real company．They worked together for more than twenty years．And made a lot of money，too．
　　I did the costumes and properties for the Chamberlain's．John Heminges said I was the best properties man in the city．
　　Will was special—because he wrote the plays．And what plays they were！He never wrote the same play twice，like some writers．He was always trying something new，something different And he wrote fast，too．
　　John Heminges could never understand that．‘How can you write so fast，Will？’he asked him．‘And you never make a mistake or change a word．’
　　Will didn't really understand it himself．‘It's all in my head，’he said．‘I think about it，and then it just comes out on paper．’
　　He wrote a play about love in 1595．Young love．It was Romeo and Juliet．It was a very sad play，because the young lovers die at the end．But the playgoers loved it．They wanted to see it again and again．
　　Will played the part of old Capulet，Juliet's father．One of the boy actors played the part of Juliet．There were no women actors，so boys played all the women's parts．Of course， Will never put real love-making on stage．He did it all with words—clever，beautiful words，and you forgot that the women and girls were really boys in dresses．Some of the boy actors were very good，and went on to play men's parts when they were older．
　　We played Romeo and Juliet at Richmond Palace that year．We always played before the Queen at Christmas．She liked to see the new plays，and she paid us ￡10 a play．We often had to work through the night to get the stage ready in time，but it was exciting to be in one of the Queen's palaces at Christmas．There was a lot of singing and dancing，and eating and drinking．Some years Christmas began in November and didn't finish until February or March．
　　The year 1596 began well，but that summer the weather was really bad．Cold．Wet．It never stopped raining，and the plague began to come back into London．We were in Stratford for the summer，but I went down to Hampshire for a few weeks to do some business for Will about some sheep．Will didn't need me at home，because he was busy writing his new play，A Midsummer Night's Dream．
　　I came back to Stratford one wet August evening．The house in Henley Street was strangely quiet，and I went round the back and up to Will's room—his writing room， we called it．He was just sitting there not doing anything，just sitting．
　　‘What's the matter，Will？I said．‘Where is everybody？’
　　‘At church．His face was grey，and his eyes looked empty，dead．
　　‘What's happened？’I asked．‘What is it？’
　　He looked at me．‘Hamnet… ’he began．‘Hamnet was ill last week，and…and he died，yesterday．He was only eleven，Toby，and he's dead．My boy．My only son．He's dead，Toby．Dead．’He put his face in his hands．
　　What Can you say to a man when something like that happens to him？I sat down next to him and put my hand on his arm．We sat together，silently．I knew that Will loved that boy of his—red-haired，bright as a new penny，full of life．Just like his father．
　　After a while I said，‘You'll have other sons
　　‘Anne's forty already．’Will's voice was tired．‘She's had no children since the twins．’
　　‘Well，now，you've got two fine girls in Susanna and Judith．They'll marry before long，and then you'll have more grandsons than you can count．You'll see．There'll be boys running up and down stairs，shouting for their Granddad Will！’
　　He smiled sadly，but his eyes were not so empty now．Pleased，I went on quickly：
　　‘And there are all your brothers—Gilbert，Richard，Edmund．They'll have sons too．The Shakespeare family will never die out．Think of the family，Will，the family！’
　　And he did．He was already a famous poet and playwright，but he was a family man，too．The next year，1597，he bought a new house for his family．It was a big，grand house，called New Place，right in the middle of Stratford．It cost ￡60—a lot of money—and the townspeople began to say‘Mr Shakespeare’，not‘Young Will the actor’or‘John Shakespeare's boy’．They were happy to do business with him，and to borrow money from him．
　　Anne was very pleased with the new house．The wife of Mr Shakespeare of New Place was an important person in Stratford．But she still didn't like Will's work．
　　‘Actors are wild，dangerous people，’she often said to him．‘I'm not interested in plays or the theatre，and I don't want to know anything about your work．’
　　But she liked the money，and the new house，and the new dresses—and the six fields of apple trees and the big farm north of Stratford that came a few years later．
　　Will never talked much about Hamnet．Life goes on and Will was busier than ever．But I know he thought about his son a lot；his grief was very deep inside him．A year or two later，I was talking to John Heminges abut the costumes for Will's new play，King John．John Heminges was a family man—he had fourteen children in the end．The noise is his house！Shouting and laughing，coming and going…
　　John was looking at the playbook．‘You see this bit here，Toby，’he said．‘Will's writing about his son，isn't he？’
　　I read the words slowly，and remembered Will's empty eyes that day in August．
　　Grief fills the room up of my absent child，
　　Lies in his bed，walks up and down with me，
　　Puts on his pretty looks，repeats his words…
　　Richard Burbage said once that Will's writing changed after Hamnet's death．Will still laughed at people in his plays，but he also felt sorry for them—sorry for all the world，good and bad，rich and poor，young and old．And his people were real．No one was all good， or all bad．
　　There was a man called Shylock in his play The Merchant of Venice．This Shylock was a money-lender and a cruel man —everyone hated him．But in the end，when Shylock lost everything，you had to feel sorry for him．He was just a sad old man．
　　Perhaps Richard was right．And if anyone understood Will，it was Richard Burbage．






■ 7 Queens，Kings，and Princes
　　Every year we took more and more plays to court at Christmas．In 1598 one of Will's plays was Henry IV．A lot of the play was about the King's son and his friend，Sir John Falstaff．Sir John was old，fat，lazy，drank too much，talked too much，laughed too much．But you had to love him．He was a great favourite with the London playgoers，and there were a lot of Falstaff jokes going round at the time．
　　After the play，the Queen wanted to speak to Will．
　　‘Why？What have We done wrong？’John Heminges said to me in a very quiet voice．
　　‘We'll find out in a minute，’I said．
　　We all watched while Will walked over to the Queen's chair．She was an old woman，she wore a red wig，and she had black teeth．But she was still a very great queen．And if the Queen was not pleased…
　　She had a good，strong voice—an actor's voice．We could hear her easily．
　　‘Mr Shakespeare，she began．Then she smiled，and suddenly you knew why all Englishmen loved the Queen．It was like the sun coming out on a spring morning．
　　‘Mr Shakespeare，you are the best playwright in England．I enjoyed your play，and I thought that Sir John Falstaff was very funny．I have known many Englishmen like him．Will you write me another play？I would like to see Sir John in love．’
　　When Will came back to us，his eyes were bright，but he was already thinking about it．
　　‘Don't talk to me，’he said．‘I've got a play to write．’
　　He wrote it in two weeks，and we took it down to Richmond Palace and played it before the Queen on February the 20th．She laughed and laughed at The Merry Wives of Windsor．
　　She didn't have much to laugh about in 1599．There was a lot of trouble in Ireland，and the Queen sent the Earl of Essex with 20，000 men to fight a war．Lord Southampton，Will's friend，went with him．All London came out on to the streets to watch when Essex and his men left for Ireland．Will wrote an exciting play about war that summer，and he put in a word or two about Ireland．That was Henry V，about a very famous English King who fought a war in France．
　　But Essex was not Henry the Fifth．He didn't know how to fight a war，and he ran away back to England later that year．The Queen never spoke to him again．
　　In September we opened the Globe theatre．It was a grand，new building near the Rose．Will，Richard Burbage，and the others paid for it themselves．It was the best playhouse in London，and soon the most famous．The other companies had good theatres and some good actors，but we had the famous Richard Burbage—and the best plays．
　　We put on three new plays by will in the next year，and some plays by other writers．One of the new playwrights was Ben Jonson．He was a clever man and he wrote clever plays，but people still liked Will's plays best．Ben couldn't understand it．He was always arguing with Will about how to write plays．He argued with everyone．He went to prison once because he killed a man in a fight．He was eight years younger than Will，but he and Will were very good friends．
　　Will's next play was Hamlet，Prince of Denmark．We all met one day in the Boar's Head to talk about it．There were six of us—me and Will，Richard Burbage，Henry Condell，John Heminges，and Augustine Phillips．
　　Will put his pile of papers on the table and sat down．
　　‘Well，’he said．‘You've all read it．What do you think？’
　　‘It's very good，’John Heminges began，‘but it's too long．It'll take about four hours in the theatre．’
　　‘We don't have to use it all，’Will said．‘We can cut it down to three hours，perhaps two and a half．’
　　Henry Condell picked up one of the paper from the table．‘Look at this bit，when Ophelia is talking about Hamlet，’he said．‘Hamlet sounds like the Earl of Essex to me．Were you thinking of Essex when you wrote this？’
　　Will smiled．‘Perhaps，’he said．‘And perhaps not．’
　　‘Richard will play Prince Hamlet，yes？’said Augustine．
　　‘Of course！’Will said．‘I wrote the part for him．He's our star actor．I'll play the ghost of Hamle's father．’He looked at me．‘Hamlet will wear black，Toby，and Ophelia will wear white．’
　　Henry finished his beer．‘It's a good story，Will，with good parts for us all．But will the playgoers like it？It moves very slowly，and they like a play to be fast and exciting．Prince Hamlet knows that his uncle Claudius murdered the king his father．But he doesn't do anything about it for a long time．He just talks about it．And in the end nearly everybody dies，one way or another．’
　　Augustine didn't agree with that．‘You haven't understood the play，Henry．It is exciting，very exciting．The play is inside Hamlet himself．He wants to kill his uncle，but he can't Murder is wrong．But he must kill him，because of his father．We can all understand how he feels．’
　　All this time Richard Burbage was silent．He was reading bits of the play again．Now he put down the paper in his hand and looked up His eyes were bright，excited．
　　‘Have any of you really listened to the language of this play？This is your best play yet，Will—the best of them all．Just listen to the language，the poetry！’He stood up，and his great voice filled the room．
　　To be，or not to be—that is the question…
　　We sat and listened，silently，while that wonderful voice brought the words to life．Will watched him，smiling．He knew that Richard，like him，was in love with words．…To die，to sleep—
　　To sleep—perchance to dream．Ay，theer's the rub．
　　For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
　　When we have shuffled off this mortal coil
　　Must give us pause．
　　Richard Burbage was right，of course．The people loved the play，they loved Burbage as Hamlet，they cried for poor Ophelia's death，and they shouted for the murderer Claudius to die．I think it was Will's most famous play．






■ 8 A Scottish King for England
　　Will's father died in September 1601．In his last years John Shakespeare was a happy man．His son was famous，and the Shakespeare family was important again in Stratford．But there weren't many children in the family．Will's sister Joan was married and had a little boy，but Will's brothers didn't have any children．
　　Susanna，Will's older daughter，was now eighteen，and Will said to her one day：
　　‘We must find you a husband soon，Susanna．’
　　But Susanna shook her head．‘Oh，I don't want to be married，Father，thank you．’
　　We all smiled at that，because there was already a young man who was often a visitor at New Place．That was John Hall，a clever young doctor．Will liked him．
　　Back in London，the theatres were always full，and actors were now important people in the city．Will and I were now living in very fine lodgings in Silver Street，with the Mountjoy family．The Globe and the Lord Chamberlain's Men were doing very well，and the older actors in the company were making money，and buying houses and land．But some people still thought that actors were dangerous，wicked people．
　　Then Queen Elizabeth died，on the 24th of March 1603，at Richmond．I remember the day well．The theatres were closed —you can't have plays when a queen is dying—and we were all at Henry Condell's house．He and John Heminges lived verg near our lodgings in Cripplegate．
　　We were all very worried．The new King of England was James the First．He was already King of Scotland，and he had a young wife，Queen Anne of Denmark，and three young children．But what was he like？Would he be a good king？And，most importantly，did he like plays？
　　‘If King James doesn't like plays，’said Henry Condell，‘we're finished．There are already a lot of Puritans on the London City Council，and they'd love to close the theatres down．’
　　Henry always looked at the black side of everything．
　　‘Well，he's written a lot of books himself，’said Will ‘Perhaps he'll be interested in plays，too We'll just have to wait and see．’
　　We didn't have to wait long．On the 19th of May I was underneath the stage in the Globe．I was trying to mend a bro-ken door in the floor of the stage．We used this door when a ghost came on or went off in a cloud of smoke．Suddenly，I heard feet running across the stage．I looked up through the hole，and saw Will and John Heminges and Richard Burbage．They were all very excited．
　　‘Listen to this，Toby，’said Will．He was holding a piece of paper in his hand．‘It's a letter from King James！From today，we are the King's Men！We're working for the King himself，and he wants to see all the plays．’
　　‘We're going to have new red coats to wear when we go to court，’Richard said．
　　‘And，’John said，‘he's going to pay us 20 for every play at court．What do you think about that，Toby？’
　　We were all laughing and smiling now．‘Well，John，’I said．‘If we're so rich，can I have a new door？I can't mend this one again—it's too old．’
　　That summer the plague came back．By July a thousand people were dying every week in London．One of them was the little son of Will's friend，Ben Jonson．By the end of the year there were 33，000 dead in England．The theatres closed，and the King's Men went on tour．
　　Will and I spent the summer at Stratford．When Christmas came，the King's Men put on a lot of plays at court．The King was at Hampton Court Palace that year，which was outside London，well away from the plague．I couldn't go because I fell off my horse one day and broke my leg．Stupid thing to do！I had to stay at home，but Will told me all about it when he came back．
　　‘The new King and Queen like to enjoy themselves，Toby，’he said．‘They're a happy family．Prince Henry，Who's nine，is very a nice little boy，and his sister Elizabeth is beautiful．Little Prince Charles is only two．’He was silent for a minute．Perhaps he was thinking about Hamnet．Then he went on，‘Qieen Anne likes plays very much．She likes music and dancing，too—she showed her legs in one dance！’
　　‘My word！’I said．‘Things like that never happened at court in Queen，Elizabeth's days．’
　　‘We live in different times，Toby．A lot of things are going to change．’
　　But change only comes slowly．The King's Men went from one success to another．At the King's court at Christmas 1604，there were twenty-two plays，and eight of them were Will's．In 1605 there were thirteen plays at court—and ten of them were Will's．
　　We always did the plays at the Globe first，before we took them to court．Will was writing more slowly now，but during these years he wrote some of his best plays：Othello，Macbeth，and King Lear．That was a sad，dark play．When King Lear carried his dead daughter Cordelia on to the stage…Well，every man，woman，and child in the Globe was crying．It's true．Richard Burbage played Lear，of course．What an actor he was！






■ 9 The Mermaid Tavern
　　During the next few years the plague was always with us．Some years it was bad，other years not so bad．When the theatres in London closed，we went on tour．Well，the King's Men did．Will and I were mostly at home in Stratford in the summers．Will was usually writing，and I did bits of business for him when I could．
　　Susanna married Dr John Hall in June，1607，and Will's granddaughter Elizabeth was born in February the next year．We had a very cold winter that year．The river Thames in London froze right up to Westminster．People had parties and cooked sheep over fires on the ice．
　　Will's brother Edmund died that winter—he was only twenty-seven—and Will's mother died in September the next year．
　　Will was writing a different kind of play at this time．John Heminges said they were dark，cruel plays，and that Will was only looking at the black side of people．But that was the thing about Will．He was still changing，trying new kinds of poetry and stories in his plays all the time．And suddenly，there was a new kind of play，full of laughing and spring flowers and love：The Winter's Tale．
　　When we were in London，we often went in the evenings to the Mermaid Tavern in Cheapside it was a very good inn，with good beer，and all the writers and poets in London went there．
　　We were there one evening in the winter of 1610，I think it was．A lot of Will's friends were there—actors，writers．Ben Jonson was there，of course．He was a great drinker all his life．He was writing a lot of plays now and was doing very well．But he never had any money—Will always paid for the beer．
　　At first，the talk was all about King James and his court．We didn't like the King so much now—he was more interest-ed in horses than in plays．Then Ben remembered something about The Winter's Tale．He knew，really，that Will's plays were the best，but he always liked to find mistakes if he could．
　　‘Now，Why did you put Bohemia by the sea，Will？’he said．‘Bohemia's in the middle of Europe！There's no sea for a hundred miles，you stupid man！’
　　‘Your plays are very clever，Ben，’Richard Burbage said，‘but they smell of the schoolbook，don't they，Will？’
　　Will laughed．‘How many people are going to worry about that，Ben？What does it matter？They liked the play at court．The Queen said it was a very sweet play，and the King—’
　　‘The King！’Ben said loudly．His face was red and angry．King James sometimes fell asleep during Ben's plays．‘The King，’he went on excitedly，‘is a very stupid man！I told him，I said it to his face：“Sir，you don't understand poetry！”’
　　John Heminges laughed．‘Oh my word！’he said．‘What a terrible man you are，Ben！I don't know how you've lived so long！’
　　Will laughed too，but he said，‘Ben，you must be careful．You don't want the King to be your enemy．Don't forget that he pays twice as much as Queen Elizabeth did—and sees twice as many plays．’
　　‘Money？'shouted Bed．He loved to argue about anything．‘We're poets and actors，not businessmen！What does money matter？’
　　‘It puts bread and meat in your stomach，and a coat on your back，’said Will，drinking his beer．‘And you're the first to shout if you haven't got any money．’
　　Ben banged his beer glass on the table．‘Now listen，Mr William Shakespeare of Stratford，with your fine big house and your expensive horses，you wrote in your play King Lear that money was—’
　　‘Oh，do stop it，you two！John Heminges said．He turned to talk to me，but a few minutes later Ben was arguing about another of Will's plays．
　　‘And what about Antony and Cleopatra？What kind of writing is that？You never know which place you're in！One minute you're in Egypt，the next minute you're in Rome，then you're at sea on a ship，then back in Egypt again—’
　　Richard Burbage didn't like that．‘You're wrong again，Ben．It's only you who can't follow the play．You think Londoners are stupid，but they understand more than you do！And another thing…’
　　I decided to go home to bed．Ben's a fine man，but he does talk so much．He goes on and on．When I left，he was calling for more beer．I knew they would be there in the Mermaid for most of the night．






■ 10 Back to Stratford
　　‘You're losing your hair，Will，’I said to him one day．
　　‘We're both getting old，Toby，’he said．‘There's no escape from it．Old and tired．’
　　‘Don't talk like that，’I said．‘You're only forty-seven．There's still some life in you yet．And another twenty plays！’
　　‘No，’he said slowly．‘No，I think the poetry is nearly finished．I'm getting tired，Toby．I need a rest．I think The Tempest is going to be my last play．I'm saying goodbye to the stage．Times are changing，and people want a different kind of play now．There are lots of new，younger writers，who know how to please the playgoer．I'm not modern any more．
　　He never usually talked like this，and I didn't like it．
　　‘There's only one Will Shakespeare，’I said，‘and he'll always be modern．Now，I must get on．I've got to go out and buy all the cloth for the new costumes in The Tempest．Why did you have to put it on an island？When the ship goes down，the actors all have to come on stage in wet clothes．It takes a day to dry the costumes，so that means two lots of clothes for everyone—wet and dry！’
　　I laughed，and then he laughed too．
　　But it was true，he was tried．I could see it，and others could see it too．But the company was always wanting new plays，and we had two theatres now．There was the Globe，and now we had the Blackfriars theatre．Plays in the Globe were in the open air and always had to be in daylight，but the Blackfriars was a building with a roof．We could put on plays in the evenings and in any weather．It also made more money，because every playgoer had a seat and paid a shilling for it．In the Globe they paid a penny to stand．
　　In February 1612 Will's brother Gilbert died in London，and just a year later his brother Richard died in Stratford．That was in February，too．Will was the oldest brother，and he was the only one still alive．We spent most of our time in Stratford these days．Will didn't act in plays now．He went to rehearsals for his new plays，of course，but he was always happy to hurry home again．
　　We were riding back to Stratford in the spring of 1613 and Stopped for the night at the Crown Inn in Oxford．Will was very friendly with the landlord John Davenant and his wife Jane．The next morning，when we left，their little son，William，came running out to say goodbye to his good friend Mr Shakespeare．He was a bright boy，about seven years old，with much the same colour hair and eyes as Will．Will talked with him for a few minutes，then gave him a penny．
　　Later，when we were riding along the road，I said，‘The last time we were in Oxford，I heard some talk in the town．Someone said that you were the father of Jane Davenant's son．
　　Will laughed，‘Well，well，’he said，‘People say that，do they？What will they say next？’
　　‘Jane's a nice-looking woman．’I looked at him out of the corner of my eye．‘Isn't she？’
　　‘Come on，Toby．You know that Jane is a good wife to John．’He was still smiling．‘You mustn't listen to stories like that．’
　　I never believed that story myself．But many years after Will died，William Davenant told a lot of people that he was Shakespeare's son．But how did he know？His mother wouldn't tell him！
　　Will was happy to get home，to see his daughters and John Hall，and little Elizabeth，who was just five then．He was happy to see Anne，I think．He never said much to her，nor she to him．But after more than thirty years together，you've already said everything，haven't you？
　　I think Judith was Will's favourite daughter．Susanna was brighter and cleverer，but Judith was Hamnet's twin，and Will still remembered his son．He wanted a son，or a grandson，so much．Judith was twenty-eight now，and still no husband．But Will told her not to hurry．She must find the right man first．
　　Will worked hard all his life，and I think it was all for his family．I remember some lines from his play The Tempest，when Prospero is talking to his daughter Miranda．
　　I have done nothing but in care of thee，
　　Of thee，my dear one，thee my daughter…






■ 11 The last years
　　Will did write another play，of course．That was Henry VIII and he wrote it because the King's daughter，Princess Elizabeth，was getting married．The King's Men had to have a new play for a special day like that．
　　We were in London for rehearsals at the Globe，and the actors put on the new play for the first time on the 29th of June，1613．I remember the date well．
　　It happened soon after the play began．Richard Burbage was on stage and he suddenly looked up and stopped in the middle of a word．
　　‘Fire！’he shouted．‘The theatre's on fire！’
　　Wooden buildings burn fast，and Henry Condell shouted，‘Everybody out！Quickly！’
　　The crowd of playgoers began to hurry to the doors，and I ran round to open them．We could all see the smoke now，and John Heminges shouted to Will，‘The playbooks！We must get the playbooks out！’
　　Everybody got out and no one was hurt．One man's coat caught fire and his friend put the fire out with a bottle of beer．But the Globe burnt right down to the ground in an hour．Poor old John Heminges just stood there and cried．
　　But you can't kill a theatre that easily．A year later there was a new blobe in the same place．Bigger and better than the old one．People said it was the finest playhouse in England．
　　We didn't often go to London in those last years．Will was happy at home in Stratford with his family．He had time for his garden，time to talk to his Stratford friends，time to play with his granddaughter Elizabeth．He read his plays again，and he and I talked and laughed about the old days．
　　Judith got married at last in February 1616．She was thirty-one then，and married a man called Thomas Quiney，who was twenty-six．Will wasn't too happy about it．
　　‘Judith loves him very much，’he said quietly to me．‘But I'm not sure about him．I think she's making a mistake．’
　　He was right，of course．Will was usually right about people．Thomas Quiney was lazy，drank too much，and went with other women．
　　But Will didn't live to find that out．In March he went to London for a party at the Mermaid Tavern．Ben Jonson was now the play wright for the court of King James．The King was paying him some money every year，and Ben wanted to give a party for his friends．
　　It was a good party，I heard．But Will caught a fever and then rode home through the cold spring rain．When he got back to New Place，he was not a well man．
　　He died on the 23rd of April，in the year 1616．
　　They put his body in Holy Trinity Church，down by the river Avon．It was a bright，windy day，I remember．Ben Jonson came down from London，and cried in the church．He was a wild man，was Ben，always fighting and arguing about plays and poetry．But he loved his friend．He came up to me outside the church．
　　‘Toby，’he said．‘Will was a good，true man，and I loved him．We'll never see another poet like him in England．’






■ 12 England will remember
　　Well，all that was thirty-three years ago．I'm an old man，and everyone is dying around me．Anne Shakespeare died in 1623，and John Hall went about twelve years later，fighting the plague Susanna's still alive，and Judith．She had three sons，but they all died．So there's no boy in the family to keep poor Will's name alive．Susanna's girl Elizabeth has had no children，and she's forty-one already…Susanna still comes to visit me sometimes，and we talk about the old days．
　　We live in sad times now；the Puritans cut King Charles's head off last January．But one day we'll have a king again．Then there'll be singing and dancing and plays．
　　You'll see．Oh yes．People won't forget William Shakespeare．In 400 years'time，the theatres will still be full．People will still laugh，and cry，over his plays．He was the finest poet that ever wrote in the English language．I think he knew that himself．There's some lines in one of his sonnets，I remember…
　　Not marble，nor the gilded monuments
　　Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme…




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Love of a King by Peter Dainty





■ The Duke and Duchess of Windsor
　　1894 Edward is born in Richmond， England．
　　1896 Wallis is born in Baltimore，USA．
　　1911 Edward becomes Prince of Wales．
　　1912 Edward enters Oxford University．
　　1914 The First World War begins．Edward sees fighing on the front line in Belgium．
　　1916 Wallis marries Winfield Spencer．
　　1920 Edward begins a five-year journey round the world． He visits 45 countries and travels 240 000 kilometres．
　　1927 Wallis divorces Winfield Spencer．
　　1928 Wallis marries Ernest Simpson．
　　1930 Edward meets Wallis at a weekend house party．
　　1936 January King George V dies． Edward is now King．
　　June Edward tells his mother that he wants to marry Wallis．
　　December Edward gives the crown to his brother and leaves Eng－land．
　　1937 Edward and Wallis marry in France． They take the name Duke and Duchess of Windsor．None of the Royal Family come to the wedding．For the next thirty years the Duke and Duchess live out－side England．
　　1966 Queen Elizabeth Ⅱ meets the Duke and Duchess at a small party in London．'It's time to forget the past，'she says．
　　1972 Edward dies in Paris．His body is buried in England at Windsor Castle．
　　1986 Wallis dies in Paris and is buried next to Edward at Windsor．
　　IN APRIL 1987， THREE HUNDRED PEOPLE CAME TO A SMALL room in Geneva，Switzerland． There were Presidents and Kings， film stars and millionaires． They came from the four corners of the world， east and west，north and south，and they spoke many languages．
　　But they all wanted one thing—to buy some jewellery．It was the jewellery that a man called Edward gave a woman called Wallis．
　　One woman，Mrs Namiki from Japan，paid ＄105 000 for a gold ring．
　　'Why did you pay all that money？'a friend asked．'You can buy a gold ring in Tokyo for half that money．'
　　'Because Wallis and Edward were special to me，'Mrs Namiki replied． 'I never met them but I'll keep that ring all my life．'
　　In the next few hours， in that small room in Geneva， the jew－ellery was sold for＄50000000． But who was Wallis？ And who was Edward？ And why was their love story so special？
　　Let's begin at the beginning…






■ 1 A Lonely Child
　　Prince Edward was born in 1894．His father，King George V， was a tall， cold man who did not like chil－dren．'Why does Edward talk all the time？'he once said．'He's a very noisy child！'
　　His mother，Queen Mary， agreed．'It doesn't matter if Edward is happy or unhappy，' she said．'A child must be silent and strong．'
　　The family lived in Buckingham Palace，which had 600 rooms．There were 8 kitchens，19 bathrooms，24 toilets， 11 dining rooms， 17 bedrooms and 21 sitting rooms．
　　Edward once told a story about the house ：Buckingham Palace was very big， and people sometimes got lost．One night my mother，my father and I were sitting in the dining room．We were waiting for our dinner．We wait－ed and waited， but the food did not come．After twenty minutes my father was very angry． He stood up and went to the kitchen．'Where is the cook？'he shouted，and where is my food？'
　　'But， Sir，' the cook replied，'your dinner left the kitchen fifteen minutes ago．Hasn't it arrived yet？'
　　'No，it hasn't，'my father shouted， 'and I'm hungry．'
　　The King left the kitchen and began to look for the food．Ten minutes later he saw a woman who was carrying three plates of meat and potatoes．'What happened to you？'my father said．'Why didn't you bring us our dinner？'
　　'I' m sorry， Sir， 'the woman replied． 'There are a lot of dining rooms． I couldn't remember where to go．But if you return to the table， Sir， this time I can follow you to the right room．'
　　Edward did not go to school with other children． He stayed in Buckingham Palace where he had a special classroom just for him．
　　This is how Edward described his lessons：
　　My teacher， Mr Hansell， was a thin man． He never smiled and his nose was very red．We had lots of books but they were all very boring． They were full of words and they didn't have any pictures．
　　Sometimes I stopped reading and looked out dow．Mr Hansell got very angry．He took a stick and hit me on the arm．'Don't look out of the window，little boy，' he shouted．'Look at the book．'He hit me many times and my arm was red．
　　Every Friday the teacher took me to my father's room．
　　'And what has my son learnt this week，Mr Hansell？'the King asked．
　　And the answer was always：'Not very much I'm afraid，Sir．Edward doesn't like his lessons． He never lis－tens to what I say．'
　　When Mr Hansell left the room，my father was angry with me．'What's wrong with you， child？'he said．'Are you stupid？ Why can't you learn anything？'
　　'But the lessons are so boring， Sir，'I replied．'And Mr Hansell hits me．'
　　'I don't understand you，Edward．You're a baby．You're so weak．You'll never be a good King． A King must be strong．Go to your room and stay there until the morning．'
　　'I spent many days alone in my room，'Edward wrote later．'I never played with other children and I didn't have any friends． I lived in the most beautiful house in England but I was always lonely and sad． I saw my mother once a day at din－ner time and I saw my father three or four times a week，but they never gave me any love．I was afraid of them and every－thing I did was wrong．'






■ 2 The Prince of Wales
　　In the spring of 1911 King George called Edward into his room and said：
　　'Next month I'll make you Prince of Wales and these are your clothes for the ceremony．'
　　The King opened a small cupboard and Edward started to cry．'But father，'he said，'I'm sixteen years old now．I can't wear soft shoes and a skirt． I'll look like a girl． Why can't I dress like other people？'
　　'Because you're different and special，'his father replied，'and one day you'll be King．'
　　Edward cried for the next two days， but there was noth-ing he could do．
　　And so， on 10th June 1911， the family drove to Caernar－von Castle in North Wales and the ceremony began．
　　The King put a small gold crown on Edward's head．There was music and dancing and the crowd began to shout．
　　The new Prince of Wales closed his eyes．'I feel terrible，' he said．'Can we go home now？'
　　'Not yet，' the King replied．'The people want to see you．
　　Edward walked to the front of the castle and looked down at the crowd．He was shaking and his face was red．
　　'Smile， Edward，'the King said．'You are happy！'
　　A few hours later the family were driving back to Windsor．'Wasn't that a lovely day！'Queen Mary said．
　　Edward took off his shoes and looked out of the window．'Never again，'he thought． 'Never again！'






■ 3 The Royal Star
　　After a year at Oxford University， Edward went to fight in the First World War．He wrote：
　　I lived in a house with twenty-five other soldiers． At night we talked about our lives and our families．It was very inter－esting．
　　I could speak freely to different people-rich and poor，young and old． But I also saw the blood and noise of war．
　　One day in 1916 my driver took me to the town of Loos in Belgium．I got out of the car and walked to the top of the hill．Down below me there was heavy fighting and I felt very sad．
　　An hour later I returned to my car．I'll never forget what I saw．My driver was dead． While I was away，some－body shot him in the neck．
　　When the war finished in 1918， Edward returned to Bucking－ham Palace． One night he was talking to his father in the din－ing room．
　　'I don't understand why countries fight，'the Prince said．'The war has finished， but nothing has changed．There are still millions of poor and hungry people． It's not right．Somebody must do something！'
　　'Well，'King George replied，'you can't change the world if you sit by the fire． You must travel．Meet people．Talk to them．Listen to what they say． And then， when you are King， you can make the world a better place．'
　　And so，in 1920，Edward left England again． During the next five years he travelled 240 000 kilometres and visited 45 different countries．
　　He saw India， Argentina， Nigeria， Mexico， New Zealand， Germany， and Japan．When he came to Toronto，in Canada， there were 500 000 people in the streets to meet him．Everywhere thousands of people waited to see him—there were crowds of 190 000 in Cape Town， 300 000 in Paris， 500 000 in New York， and 750 000 in Melbourne．
　　'Edward is the first royal star，'one newspaper wrote，'and he is now the most famous man in the world．In the old days princes were cold and bored．But Edward is different． He gets out of his car and walks down the street． Every two or three minutes he stops and speaks with the crowd．He laughs．He smiles． He shakes a thousand hands． He is a man of the people with a heart of gold．'






■ 4 The Meeting
　　In the autumn of 1930 Edward went to stay with his friends Lord and Lady Furness．This is how he described that weekend in a book called A King's Story：
　　On Saturday the weather was cold and windy．It was raining heavily so we could not ride our horses． We decided to stay in the house and have an early lunch with some of Lady Furness' friends．
　　At one o'clock Wallis arrived with her husband． She was beautifully dressed and she smiled all the time．She spoke with Lord Furness for a few minutes，and then Lady Fur－ness brought her over to see me．
　　'Sir，I would like you to meet one of my dearest and sweetest American friends，Mrs Wallis Simpson．'
　　'How do you do， Mrs Simpson，'I said．'Please come and sit down．'
　　Lady Furness left us and we began to talk．
　　I could see that Wallis was not felling very well．She had a bad cold and her eyes were red． 'I'm afraid that our English houses aren't very warm，'I said． 'We don't have American central heating here．'
　　There was a long silence．Mrs Simpson turned her face and looked out of the window．Then she said：'You have disappointed me，Sir．'
　　'And why is that？'I asked．
　　'Because everybody asks me about American central heat－ing．I thought that the Prince of Wales would talk about something more interesting．'
　　I began to laugh．
　　'What's the matter，Sir？'Wallis asked．'Have I said something wrong？'
　　'No，'I replied．'I'm laughing because you didn't lie to me．You told me the truth．'
　　'But why is that funny？ Doesn't everybody do that？'
　　'One day I'll be King of England，' I replied．'And people are afraid of me．If I say that the sky is yellow， they say，“Yes，Sir，you are right”． If I say that Wednesday is the first day of the week， they say，“Yes，Sir，you are right”． And if I say that Scotland is bigger than Canada，they say， “Yes，Sir，you are right”．But you told me that I was boring！ You told me the truth．I like that！'
　　There was another silence and then Wallis began to laugh．'Can I say one more thing，Sir？'
　　'Yes， Mrs Simpson，what is it？'
　　'It's your trousers，Sir．'
　　'My trousers？'
　　'Yes， Sir．They are black and your shoes are brown．'These two colours don't look right together．'
　　I stood up and looked in the mirror．'Yes，Mrs Simp－son，you're right．I look very strange．The next time we meet，I will be better dressed．'
　　When lunch was ready，we walked through into the dining room．I sat at one end of the table and Wallis sat at the other end．I was watching her very carefully．I thought how beautiful her hands were．She began talking to Lady Furness and then， a few minutes later， she turned and smiled at me．I felt very happy．
　　After lunch Wallis came over to say goodbye．'My hus－band and I have to leave now，Sir．We're going to another party in London．'
　　I wanted to speak to her but I could not find the right words．I don't know why． We shook hands and Wallis walked away．
　　I went into the next room and sat down near Lady Fur－ness．'Tell me about Mrs Simpson，'I said．
　　'What would you like to know？'she asked．
　　'Everything！' I said．
　　'Then perhaps，Sir，you would like to walk in the gar－den．We can talk more freely there．'
　　We stood up and left the house by the back door．We walked slowly through the trees，and Lady Furness told me about Wallis…






■ 5 Wallis
　　This is how Lady Furness described Mrs Simpson's early life to Edward：
　　Wallis was born in Baltimore．She never knew her father．He died when she was five months old． But her mother was a strong and loving woman， and Wallis was a happy child．
　　When she was twenty，she married a man called Win－field Spencer．For the first few years they were happy togeth－er． But one day Winfield lost some money in the street．He was very angry． When he came home， he took a bottle of whisky from a cupbodrd and began to drink．
　　That night he hit Wallis in the mouth． She screamed and he hit her again．There was blood on her face and she was shaking like a leaf．' Please， Winfield，'she said．'No more．
　　But Winfield took her arm and pulled her up the stairs．'You're my prisoner，'he shouted at her，'and you're not going to leave．'Then he pushed her into the bathroom and locked the door．
　　The next morning Wallis went back to her family．'I can't stay with him，'she said．'I want a divorce．'
　　'Poor Wallis，'Edward said．'But what happened next，Lady Furness？'
　　'Well，'said Lady Furness，'a few months later she met a fine man called Ernest Simpson． He's quiet， but interesting．They got married and they now live in a beautiful flat in the centre of London．'
　　'And are they happy？'asked Edward．
　　Lady Furness looked at the Prince and smiled．'I don't know，Sir，'she said．'I don' t know．'
　　During the next two years the Prince saw Wallis once or twice a week．They had the same friends， and they often met at parties．
　　'Mrs Simpson knew a lot about life，'Edward once said．'She loved books， food， people， and travel． She was very beautiful and her eyes were full of fire． She was friendly and easy to talk to and，after a while，I opened up my heart． We had no secrets．I told her everything．And that's how it all began．'
　　'His eyes were always sad，'Wallis said about Edward．'And sometimes he looked like a child— so young， so quiet， so weak． He had no real friends． Perhaps people were a little afraid of him． But he was a warm and kind man． When he talked to me， I felt my heart jump．I wanted to be alone with him， but I knew that wasn't possible．Did the Prince love me in those early days？ No，I don't think so．But each time we met，we just felt closer and closer．'
　　In June 1933 Edward gave a birthday party for Wallis，and during the next few months he visited the Simpson's flat in London almost every day．
　　One evening， the Prince asked Wallis and Ernest to go skiing in Austria．'I'm sorry， Sir，'Mr Simpson replied．'I have to go to America on business．But perhaps Wallis and her aunt can come with you．'
　　'We went to Kitzbühl as friends，'Wallis wrote later，'but when we came home， we were in love． And a few months later the Prince asked me to marry him． It was just like a dream！'






■ 6 The King is Dead！Long Live the King！
　　In January 1936 Edward went to Windsor for a few weeks． He was tired of town life and he wanted to work in his garden and ride his horses．
　　But then，one afternoon，there was a phone call from Queen Mary．'Edward，'she said，'you must come back im-mediately． Your father is very ill and I think he's going to die．'
　　When Edward arrived， he went straight to his father's room．He walked to the side of the bed and kissed his father's white face． The King opened his eyes and smiled．Then he took his son's hand and said：'Be a good King，Edward．And be good to your mother．'
　　'Yes，father， I will．'
　　The King closed his eyes and did not speak again． Just af－ter midnight he died．
　　Then Queen Mary took Edward's hand and kissed it．'My child， you are now King，'she said softly．'God be with you．
　　His three brothers came to him， one by one， and they each kissed his hand．'The King is dead．Long live the King，'they said．
　　At one o'clock Edward left the room to telephone Wallis．“My father is dead，'he said．
　　'I'm so sorry， Sir．'
　　'I must stay here for a while，'Edward went on．'But I'll phone you at the weekend．Nothing will change between you and me．I love you more than ever，and you will be my Queen．'
　　'Let's not talk about that now，'Wallis replied．'You must go back to your family．'
　　'But you are my family， Wallis． You are everything to me．Goodnight．Sleep well．'
　　When Wallis put the phone down that night， she sudden-ly felt afraid．'Edward is now King，'she thought，'but what will happen to me？'



■ 7 The Church
　　In the spring of 1936，Mrs Simpson wrote a letter to her husband．
　　'Dear Ernest，'she wrote．'You have been very kind to me．You are a good and strong man．But I must tell you that our marriage is finished．I am in love with the King and I want a divorce．Don't be angry．There is nothing you can do．I'll never forget you， but I have to be free．'
　　Ernest replied immediately：'Your letter arrived this morning． I will do what you ask， but I'll never stop loving you．And if you need me，I'll always be here．'
　　That night the King and Wallis met at a small restaurant in Piccadilly． Edward read Ernest's letter again and again．'That's wonderful news，'he said．'Nothing can stop us now！'
　　The next day， when Edward came down to breakfast，Gordon Lang， the Archbishop of Canterbury，was waiting for him．
　　'Good morning， Gordon，'the King said．'How nice to see you again． And what can I do for you？'
　　For a minute the Archbishop said nothing． Then he opened a small black bag and took out three newspapers．'I have come to see you about Mrs Wallis Simpsonn，'he began．'The newspapers say that you want to marry her． Are these stories true，Sir？'
　　'Yes，Gordon， Wallis is going to be my wife．'
　　'But that's not possible，'the Archbishop replied．'You know what the Church thinks about marriage and divorce． Di－vorce is wrong in the eyes of God！'
　　Edward smiled and then said：'Can I ask you some ques－tions about God， Mr Lang？'
　　'Yes， of course， Sir．'
　　'Is God happy when two people fall in love？'
　　'Yes， Sir， but…'
　　'And is God happy when two people fall in love and get married？'
　　'Yes，Sir，but…'
　　'And is God happy when two people fall in love，get mar－ried， and live happily together？'
　　'Yes，Sir，but…'
　　'Then，Archbishop， Wallis and I will make God very happy．We are in love， we'll get married， and we'll live to－gether happily！'
　　'But you don't understand，Sir，'Mr Lang replied．'The Church says that divorce is wrong． Mrs Simpson cannot leave Mr Simpson and then marry you．You must forget about her and find another woman． Please，Sir， I must ask you to think again．'
　　'That is not possible，'Edward said softly．'When Wallis is free，I shall marry her．'
　　There was a long silence．The Archbishop looked down at the floor and shook his head． 'You're making a big mistake，Sir，'he said． 'The Church is very strong，and we will not have this woman as our Queen！'
　　Suddenly Edward stood up， his face red and angry．'Thank you for coming，'he said．'But I have nothing more to say．And I want to be alone．'
　　The Archbishop stood up to go， but then turned and touched the King's arm．'Please，Sir， think again． The Church will be against you．'
　　'I don't care，'Edward replied．'I have God on my side，and that is all I need．Goodbye， Mr Lang．'






■ 8 The Storm
　　In July and August Wallis and the King sailed the Mediter－ranean． They met Prime Minister Metaxas in Greece，Kemal Ataturk in Turkey，and King Boris in Bulgaria． But that summer is famous for Edward's clothes．On the journey from Athens to Istanbul， the King took off his shirt to get brown in the sun． It was hot， and ten minutes later he was asleep．So he did not see the young photographer who was now taking pictures of the King…
　　When Edward returned from the Mediterranean，there was a letter waiting for him．
　　It was from Mr Albert Thompson of Birmingham， who wrote：'I saw a picture of you in the newspaper this morning and I felt very angry．I have never seen a King dressed as bad-ly as you were！ No shirt！ And no tie，no socks，no hat… and in short trousers！ How could you，Sir？'
　　Edward showed this letter to Stanley Baldwin，the Prime Minister．'What do you think of this？'the King asked．
　　'Mr Thompson is right， Sir，'the Prime Minister replied．'You want to be modern， but the people don't like it．'
　　Edward put the letter on the fire．'And do you think that divorce is “modern”， Mr Baldwin？'
　　The Prime Minister sat down．'Yes， Sir，'he began，'I've read about this Mrs Simpson．She has two husbands still alive．And you must understand what that means， Sir．She cannot marry a King．'
　　'But I cannot live without her，'Edward said．
　　'Then，Sir，'the Prime Minister replied，'I can see there's a storm coming．I have talked to your family and to Archbishop Lang， and we will not have this woman as our Queen．'
　　That night the Prime Minister and the King spoke for many hours． There were hundreds of questions， but only one answer． And so，in the early hours of the next morning， Ed-ward said：
　　'You tell me that Wallis cannot marry a King．So there is only one thing that I can do．I will give the crown to my brother， and leave England．I must follow my heart． You tell me that it's a crime to fall in love．You tell me that it's wrong to be happy．How strange this country is！'
　　An hour later Edward telephoned Wallis．'The Prime Minister says that a storm is coming，'Edward said．'So I want you to go away．'
　　Wallis packed her bags and left for France． Then Edward went to see his mother．
　　It was a sad， strange， and angry meeting．'Do you know what you are doing？'the Queen asked．'Look out of that window． Outside this palace there are 400 000 000 people who call you King．They need you．And you will leave all this for Mrs Simpson？'
　　'Yes，mother， I will． I'm in love．'
　　'Love？'Queen Mary shouted．'You're a King！You must love your country first！'
　　'But I'm also a man，'Edward said softly，'and there's nothing that I can do．'
　　That afternoon the King telephoned Winston Churchill， one of his closest friends．
　　'I have some sad news，'Edward began．'Last night Mr Baldwin came to see me． I have decided to go away next week．'
　　'Do you mean on holiday， Sir？'
　　'No，Winston，I'm leaving England．I'm never coming back．George will be King．'
　　'But that's not right， Sir．You're a free man．You must stand and fight．'
　　'No，' the King said．'I have seen war and it's a terrible thing．I don't want to fight again．'
　　'But the people love you．And they want Wallis to be Queen．'
　　'Perhaps they do，'Edward replied．'But she cannot be Queen． My enemies are stronger than I am．I am just a sailor．And when the winds change， the sea moves and it takes my boat away．'






■ 9 The Woman I Love
　　A few days later Mr Churchill came to see Edward at Buckingham Palace．At first the King was quiet．Then he said：'This is my last night in England，Winston．I love this country．I wanted to be a modern，kind King．I wanted to change the world，but they stopped me．And now I have to leave．'
　　It was ten o'clock．Edward stood up and walked over to the window．In the dark streets below there were hundreds of people．They were singing and calling his name：'Edward，Edward，we love Edward！'they shouted．'Long live the King！Long live love！'
　　Suddenly the King turned to Mr Churchill．'Why is this happening to me，Winston？'he cried．'What have I done wrong？'
　　He sat down and put his head in his hands．There was a silence in the room，but through the open window came the shouting from the street．'Long live Edward！Long live love！Long live Edward！Long live love！'
　　Mr Churchill came over and put his hand on the King's arm．Edward looked up．'Thank you，Winston，'he said．'You were a good friend to me．'
　　'Thank you，Sir．And you were a good King．'
　　At ten o'clock the next morning the telephone rang in Edward's bedroom．
　　'They're ready for you now，Sir，'a voice said．
　　The King walked slowly down the stairs．In front of him there was an open door．The family were waiting for him．His mother sat near the window，dressed in black．His brothers stood beside her．'How close they are！'the King thought．
　　On a small table in the centre of the room there was a piece of paper．Edward sat down and read these words：
　　I，Edward the Eighth，King of Great Britain，King of India，King of Australia，King of New Zealand，King of Canada，King of Kenya，King of Nigeria，King of Bur-ma，King of Malaya，King of Singapore，and King of thirty-two other countries，have today given the crown to my brother George．
　　God be with him and all his people．
　　10th December 1936．
　　Edward took a pen and wrote his name at the bottom of the page．Then he stood up and kissed his brother's hand．
　　'I never wanted this to happen，'George said．'This is the worst day of my life．'
　　Edward walked over to his mother．'Before I kiss you，'she said，'there are some things that I want to say．I have never understood you，child．This morning you were a King．But tonight，you'll run from England like a thief．Alone．An-gry．Afraid．You think that you're free．But you're not．You cannot be free．
　　'Everyone needs their family．Everyone needs their home．And tonight you have lost both those things．
　　'I love you．I am your mother and nothing can change that．But if you marry that woman，you will break my heart．Go now．It is all very sad．'
　　Edward kissed Queen Mary's hand．Then he turned and walked away．
　　The next day Edward returned to Windsor Castle．He went into a small，cold room at the top of the building．From there，he spoke on BBC radio to Britain and the world．
　　This is what he said：
　　Tonight，for the first time，I can say a few words to you．Earlier today I gave the crown to my brother George．He is now your King．I will soon leave this country and travel to France．My heart is with Wallis and I cannot live without the woman I love．'
　　I don't know what will happen to me．Perhaps I will never see England again．But think of me tonight when I sail across the sea．
　　God be with you．Long live King George！
　　Edward left Windsor Castle and got into a large black car．It was now midnight and it was just beginning to rain．
　　'Take me away as quickly as you can，'he said．The car moved off into the darkness and the rain．
　　'What a night！'said the driver．'I think the sky is cry-ing，Sir．'
　　At 1．30 a．m．they arrived at Portsmouth．Edward got out of the car and a voice said：'The King is here！'
　　Edward stopped and looked out across the open sea．There was a thin，cold smile on his face．'King？'he said．'No，I am not the King．I am just a man in love．'
　　Then he turned and walked onto the ship and into the night．






■ 10 The Wedding
　　The next morning Edward telephoned Wallis from Boulogne．
　　'Did you listen to me on the radio？'he asked．
　　'Yes，of course，'she said．
　　'And how did you feel？'
　　'I was sitting in my room alone，'Wallis said．'And when I listened to your words，I felt so sad．I put my hands over my eyes and I just cried．I couldn't stop myself．You have left everything for me．But I love you so much，Edward，and with me，you'll be the happiest man in the world．'
　　'I am that already，'he replied．'You are all that matters in my life．'
　　Edward married Wallis Simpson six months later，on 3rd June1937．None of the Royal Family came to the wedding．Edward was forty-three．Wallis was forty-one．And they now took a new name-the Duke and Duchess of Windsor．
　　A few weeks later Edward wrote to his brother King George．'I was surprised that you didn't come to the wedding，'he wrote．'But Wallis is now my wife and nothing can change that．As you know，we have a house in Paris．But France is not my home，and I want to live again at Windsor with Wallis by my side．'
　　I'm sorry，Edward，'King George wrote back．'But you know how I feel about that woman．I do not like her．I will never like her．You can live here，but Wallis cannot．'
　　'My brother'，Edward said later，'pushed me away like a dog．I will never forget what he did．And after that I decided that I didn't want my family．They didn't want Wallis，and so I didn't want them．'






■ 11 Paris
　　For the next thirty years the Duke and Duchess lived in Paris．They gave parties and travelled round the world，but they never went back to Buckingham Palace．
　　When King George died in 1952 and Queen Mary died in 1961，Edward returned to Windsor for a few days．But Wallis stayed in France．'It's your family，'she said．'Not mine．'
　　But then，in 1966，the Duke and Duchess met Queen Elizabeth（the daughter of King George）at a small party in London．After thirty long years it was time to forget the past．Elizabeth kissed the Duchess and touched her arm．Then she turned to the Duke and said：'Wallis is so beautiful，uncle．I think you're a lucky man．'
　　'That day Elizabeth was very kind to us，'Edward wrote later．'But why couldn't my mother or my brother say those words to me？'
　　On BBC television in 1969 the Duke and Duchess spoke about their life together．
　　'Do you argue？'someone asked them．
　　'No，not really，'the Duchess replied．'But there's one thing about my husband that I really don't like．He is always late．It doesn't matter if he's meeting a queen，a president，or a film star．He can never arrive on time．I don't know why．I have tried to change him，but it's just not possible．'
　　The Duke smiled and touched her hand．'I know that I'm often late，'he said．'But on our wedding day，I arrived at the church twenty minutes before you．I was early and you were late．'
　　'Yes，that's true，'the Duchess said．And they both laughed．
　　'You could see real love in their eyes，'one newspaper wrote．'They were on television，but they forgot about the cameras and the millions of people who were watching．They were just two people in love．'
　　The Duchess was famous for her jewellery．'After my husband，'she once said，'I love jewellery more than anything else in the world．'And after thirty-five years with the Duke she had hundreds of pieces，which came from all over the world．
　　'I have never met a more beautiful woman than Wallis，'Edward wrote，'and I love giving her presents．She has given me so much happiness．I buy her jewels to say“thank you”．'
　　In May 1972 the Duke became ill．When the doctor arrived，he listened to Edward's heart and then said：'How many cigarettes do you have a day，Sir？'
　　'About forty or fifty，'the Duke replied．'But please don't ask me to stop．I've smoked for sixty years and I cannot change now．'
　　That night Edward called Wallis into the room．'I feel very tired，'he said．'And I'm afraid．I love you．I have been very happy with you，and you have been a wonderful wife．When I die，I want you to take my body back to Windsor．Will you do that for me？'
　　'Yes，of course，'she said．And they both began to cry．
　　The Duke of Windsor died one hour later with Wallis by his side．
　　Three days later，a blue aeroplane arrived in Paris．Wallis went back to England with the Duke's body and，for the first time in her life，she entered Buckingham Palace．
　　A week later the Duchess returned to France，and for the next fourteen years she lived alone in Paris．The big house was dark．The doors were locked and she did not go out．
　　In the afternoons she sat in the dining room with Edward's love letters．'They were so beautiful，'she said．'I read them again and again．'
　　But then，in 1986，Wallis became ill．She went to a small hospital near the house，and a few days later she died．'With-out Edward，'she once wrote，'my life was empty．'
　　She was buried in England next to her husband at Wind-sor．'It's a strange thing，'one newspaper wrote．'When they were alive，the Duke and Duchess could never live in Britain．It was only in death that they could be there together．'






■ 12 Long Live Love！
　　In 1970，two years before his death，Edward said：
　　There are some people who think that I was wrong to give away my crown．But they don't understand true love．
　　When I was young，I lived in Buckingham Palace．I could have anything that I wanted．But I wasn't happy be-cause my heart was empty．
　　Then I met Wallis and everything changed．For half of my life I have lived here with the most beautiful woman in the world．And she is everything to me．
　　When I sit in my garden with the Duchess by my side，I sometimes think about my early life．I remember the days alone in my bedroom．I remember the teacher who hit me with a stick．I remember the war and my travels around the world．And then I remember the crowds of people below my window，who shouted：'Long live love！'
　　On my last night in London I spoke with Winston Churchill．In the middle of our conversation he said：'I think，Sir，that the best things in life are free．'I have nev-er forgotten those words．And now，many years later，I un-derstand what they mean．You cannot buy happiness．And you cannot buy love．
　　To be happy deep inside your heart is the most wonderful thing in the world．I have been a lucky man．And so I say：
　　'Thank God for Wallis，and LONG LIVE LOVE！'




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Dead Man's Island by John Escott





■ 1 Coming to England
　　My name is Carol Sanders．
　　I live in England now，but when I was younger，I lived in Hong Kong．My father was a businessman there and my mother worked as a secretary．We lived in Hong Kong for seven years．
　　I was happy at school， with lots of friends，and we had a good time．I liked pop music—the Rolling Stones，David Bowie and Jake Rosso were my favourites．
　　Jake Rosso was my favourite singer． He died in a car accident the year I left school， but I listened to his pop records all the time．I had hundreds of pictures and photos of him on my bedroom wall．
　　Then one day in winter when I was seventeen，things began to go wrong for me．
　　My father went to Australia on business．I loved him very much and didn't like him going away．
　　‘Come home quickly，’I always said to him．
　　He was in Australia for two weeks．Then， on the day of his journey home， an aeroplane from Sydney crashed into the sea just south of Hong Kong．Everybody on the plane died．
　　I heard about the plane crash on television．At first， I did not think about my father．Then I remembered he was flying back from Sydney on that day．
　　‘Oh，no！’I cried．
　　I telephoned the airport but they did not know the names of all the passengers then．
　　‘Perhaps my father didn't get that plane，’I thought．‘ Oh，please！Please！’
　　My mother was at work and I called her on the telephone．She came home quickly and we went to the airport and waited for news．
　　Later，we learned my father was on the plane．
　　‘It's not true！’I shouted．
　　But it was true， and I began to cry．
　　I cried for weeks and weeks．I spent many days alone in my room．I was lonely and sad and I wanted to die，too．
　　I stopped going out with my friends． I didn't want to see other people．I stopped listening to Jake Rosso's records， and took his pictures off my bedroom wall． I didn't listen to music or watch television． Nothing mattered any more．
　　Then I stopped crying．I stopped feeling sad and began to feel angry．
　　‘Why did it happen to him？’I asked my mother．‘Why do the best people die？Jake Rosso．My father．’
　　‘I… I don't know， Carol，'my mother said．She was unhappy，too．
　　At the time of the plane crash， I was a student at college．I enjoyed the college work and life very much， but after my father's death I stopped doing my work at the college．I began to go out with some new friends．They were different from my other friends，and my mother didn't like them．
　　‘ They're bad people，Carol，'she told me．‘They do dangerous things．’
　　‘They're exciting，’I said．‘And I like them．’
　　I knew she was angry but I didn't care． But then I learned my new friends took drugs，and I began to take drugs，too．It was wrong and stupid，I know that now， but I was unhappy and angry．
　　The police came to the college to arrest some of the students．They didn't arrest me， but I had to leave the college．It was a bad time．
　　My mother was very unhappy with me．‘What am I going to do with you，Carol？ she said．
　　‘I'm sorry，’I told her．
　　‘We'll go back to England，'she said．‘You can find a college there．Perhaps you can be happier in England．’
　　‘All right，’I said．‘I want to forget what's happened．I want to forget what I've done and begin a new life， be a new person．’
　　A month later， we came back to England．We lived in London，in a hotel．It was strange，at first， with all the red buses and everybody speaking English．It was the beginning of the summer，three months before college began in the autumn．London was full of tourists．
　　We looked at all the famous buildings—Buckingham Palace，the Tower of London．And we went to restaurants and theatres in the evenings．It was interesting and exciting and I began to forget the bad times in Hong Kong．
　　‘I'm pleased we came to London，’I told my mother．
　　But after a few weeks，she said，‘You need to find a college，Carol．You must go on studying． And I need a job．’
　　That evening， we looked in the newspapers．
　　‘What about this？’I said．I showed my mother a job in the newspaper．
　　SECRETARY
　　for the summer months
　　on a small private island in Scotland．
　　Live with the family in a big house．
　　interseting work and good pay
　　for the right person．
　　Phone Greta Poss．Telephone number 071…
　　‘Well， that sounds interesting，'said my mother．‘I'd like to work as a secretary on an island in Scotland．It's a beautiful country， Carol， and you can go to a college there in the autumn．’
　　‘And it's a place to live for the summer，’I said．‘Hotels are expensive．’
　　My mother telephoned Greta Ross．
　　Come and see me tomorrow， Greta Ross told her．‘Come to Savoy Hotel at eleven o'clock．’
　　I went to Savoy Hotel with my mother．It was big and ex pensive，bigger than our hotel，and in the centre of London．
　　‘Mum needs this job，I thought．‘And a private island in Scotland is a nice place to live．Perhaps I can forget what's happened if I go there．’
　　‘Room twenty－two，'said the woman at the hotel desk．‘Go on up． Mrs Ross will see you now．’
　　Greta Ross was waiting for us．She was about thirty years old and very beautiful．She wore an expensive red dress and her hair was very long and dark．
　　‘This is my daughter，Carol，'said my mother．
　　‘Hallo， Carol，'said Greta Ross．
　　‘Hallo，’I said．
　　‘Carol is eighteen years old，'said my mother．‘Can she come with me，if I get the job？ Perhaps she can help in the house or in the garden．She likes gardening．She's studying farming at college．’
　　‘Perhaps， said Greta Ross．‘There's a small farm on the island．’
　　‘I'd like to work on the farm，’I said．
　　Greta Ross looked at my mother．‘How long did you live in Hong Kong，Mrs Sanders？’
　　‘Seven years，’answered my mother．‘My husband died in a plane crash last year，so we've come back to live in England．’
　　‘Where did you live before Hong Kong？’
　　‘We lived in India for three years．’
　　Then Greta Ross took my mother into a room and asked her more questions．I waited outside．
　　‘Greta Ross is nice，’I thought．‘I hope my mother gets the job．’
　　Soon after，the door opened and my mother came out．She was smiling．
　　Greta Ross said，‘Please wait here for a minute，Mrs Sanders．I want to make a phone call．'she went back into the room，and closed the door．
　　I was sitting on a chair near the door，and I could just hear Greta Ross's voice speaking on the phone．
　　‘I think I've found someone，'she was saying．‘She has a daughter，but the girl can work in the garden or on the farm… Don't worry，they've been away from England for ten years… It'll be all right，I tell you… Don't worry．’
　　After a few minutes， Greta Ross put down the phone and came ont of the room．
　　‘You've got the job，'she told my mother．
　　My mother was pleased．‘Thank you，'she replied．
　　I was pleased，too， but now I was worried about that phone call．I didn't understand it．






■ 2 The Island
　　We went to Scotland the next day，first by plane，then by train．Greta Ross travelled with us．
　　I looked out of the train window and saw fields and villages and mountains．‘Mum is right，’I thought．‘Scotland is a very beautiful place．’
　　‘You're going to be my husband's secretary，’Greta Ross told my mother He's a businessman，but he never leaves the island．He does all his work by telephone and letter and computer．He invests money in companies， all over the world．’
　　‘Do many people live on the island？’I asked．
　　‘Not many，'said Greta Ross．‘You'll meet them soon．’
　　‘Greta Ross is young，’I thought．‘Is her husband young，too？ How can a young man buy an island？Is he very rich？’
　　After the train， we went on Mr Ross's boat， which took us out to the island． The boatman was a young man． He had dark hair and was brown from the sun．
　　‘This is Tony， said Greta Ross．‘He works for Mr Ross．’
　　‘Hi，'said Tony．
　　Soon we were near the island．I could see the beaches and the cliffs． The boat slowed down．
　　‘There are dangerous rocks around the island，’explained Tony．‘A lot of them are under the water and you can't see them．I have to be careful．But the rocks keep other boats away，and that pleases Mr Ross．’
　　‘Why？’I asked．
　　Tony looked at Greta Ross but she wasn't listening．‘Mr Ross doesn't like visitors to the island，'tony said in a quiet voice．
　　Then Greta Ross looked at us and Tony said no more．
　　‘Why doesn't Mr Ross like visitors？’I thought．‘Has he something to hide？’
　　When we arrived on the island， my mother and I followed Greta up to the house．It was very big and there were trees all around it．
　　A woman was waiting inside the house．
　　‘This is Mrs Duncan，Tony's mother，'said Greta．‘She's the housekeeper and her husband is the gardener．Mrs Duncan will take you up to your rooms． I'm going to tell Mr Ross you've arrived．’
　　The housekeeper was a little woman with short hair． She went up the stairs，and my mother and I went after her．
　　My room was next to my mother's．I looked out of the win dow and saw the garden at the back of the house．A man was working in the garden，near some trees．‘Is that Mr Duncan？’I thought．I looked between the trees and saw the sea．‘It's a beautiful house and a beautiful island．’
　　That evening，we had dinner with Mr and Mrs Duncan and Tony．We ate in the big kitchen．
　　‘What happened to Mr Ross's last secretary？’asked my mother．
　　‘She's in hospital，'replied Mrs Duncan．‘She's going to be away all summer．’
　　‘Isn't Mrs Ross lonely here？’I said．
　　‘No，'said Mrs Duncan．‘She likes painting a lot．She has a room upstairs and goes there to paint．She's very good．Sometimes she goes to different places on the island to paint pictures．’
　　We finished eating our meal．Soon after，Greta Ross came into the kitchen．
　　‘Mr Ross wants to see you and your daughter now，Mrs Sanders，'she said Follow me，please．’
　　We followed her through the house and into a big room．This was Mr Ross's office and he was sitting behind a desk．
　　I was surprised．He was a young man，about thirty．He had a moustache，short dark hair，and he wore glasses．
　　Mr Ross was speaking into the telephone．‘Who does he look like？’I thought．‘Is it Tony Duncan？’
　　‘Mr Ross is talking to a business friend in New York，'said Greta．‘Please，sit down．’
　　While we waited， I looked around the office．There were three telephones，a computer， and lots of books and papers．
　　There was another door and I could see a smaller room，next to the office．There was a smaller desk and another computer in there．
　　Mr Ross finished speaking on the phone，then looked care fully at my mother and me．For a few seconds he didn't speak，and just watched us．Then he said，‘I'm pleased to meet you，Mrs Sanders．I need some help with my work．My secretary is in hospital，and there's a lot of work to do． Sometimes you’11have to work late at night，because of time differences in New York and Tokyo．Is that all right？’
　　‘Yes， that's all right，’said my mother．
　　‘Can you use a computer？’
　　‘Yes．’
　　‘Good．’He looked at me．‘Is this your daughter？’
　　‘Yes， this is Carol，'said my mother．
　　‘Hallo，’I said．
　　‘Greta says you like gardening．There's a big garden here，so you can help Mr Duncan．And there's a farm．Dan and Stella Parks live in the farmhouse and work on the farm．You can help them，too．We have some animals．Some sheep，a few cows and chickens．And there's a horse called Smoke．He's grey，like his name．Can you ride？’
　　‘Yes，’I said．‘I can ride a horse．’
　　‘You can ride Smoke around the is land，if you like．’
　　‘I'd like that，’I said．‘Thank you．’
　　‘And we grow vegetable and fruit，’he said．‘I work on the farm sometimes．I enjoy it．’
　　I smiled at him but he didn't smile back．
　　‘Carol will enjoy working on the farm，'said my mother．‘Won't you，Carol？’
　　‘Yes，’I said．
　　‘Mr Ross looks sad，’I thought．‘But how did he get all his money？ And why does he hide away on an island？’






■ 3 The Photograph
　　I worked in the garden for the first two days．The weather was hot and sunny．I liked working with Mr Duncan，and he was pleased with my work．
　　‘You're a good gardener，’he said．
　　‘I've always liked gardening，’I said．‘But I'm studying at college to be a farmer．’
　　Sometimes I saw Greta Ross．
　　‘She likes to be alone，’I thought．Once or twice I saw Greta go out with her painting things．She went up on the hills or down to the beach．
　　Mr Duncan took me to the farm and I met Dan and Stella Parks．They were very friendly．
　　‘You can work on the farm for the next three days，'said Day Parks．‘Mr Duncan says you're a good gardener．Are you a good farmer，too？’
　　I smiled at him．‘I am，’I said．
　　He smiled back．
　　So I worked on the farm with Mr and Mrs Parks．They were nice people．I helped with the cows and the chickens，and went up on the hills with Mr Parks and his dog to look after the sheep．
　　One afternoon I went out riding． Smoke was a big， lazy，friendly horse．I enjoyed riding and Smoke knew his way around the island very well．I learned new places to go to．
　　I rode along the cliff top and then in between some trees．When we came out of the trees， I saw the house from the other side．I tried to find the window of my room．Which one was it？
　　Suddenly，I saw a face at one of the windows．The face was looking at me．It was there for just a second or two，then it moved away quickly．
　　‘Who was thst？’I thought．‘Was it Mr Ross？And which room was it？’
　　I didn't see my mother very much that first week．She worked all day and in the evenings．She wrote letters to South America，Japan，Canada and Australia． Sometimes，she worked after I was in bed．
　　‘Mr Ross works hard，'she told me．‘He invests money in many companies and countries．But it's not his money．’
　　‘It's not？’I was surprised by this．
　　‘No，it's his wife's money．And she bought the island．It's her island，her house，her farm．Everything belongs to her．’
　　‘How strange！But why does Mr Ross always look sad？And why does he never leave the island？’I asked．
　　‘I don't know，'said my mother．‘He says he likes it here and likes working on his farm．It's strange，I know．’
　　Sometimes，when I finished work，I walked along the beaches or the cliffs．Or I went swimming in the sea．I liked swimming．Greta Ross often came to the beach to swim，but Mr Ross never came．
　　‘Stay away from the rocks，Carol，’Greta Ross told me．‘They're very dangerous．’
　　‘I will，’I said．
　　Sometimes I took my camera to the beach and took photographs of some of the boats that went by．I took photographs of the birds on the cliffs．
　　There were other small islands near our island， and boats with tourists stopped at them．But no boats stopped at our island．They kept away from the dangerous rocks．Tony was right．The island did not have visitors．
　　One day，I was walking back to the house，and had my camera with me．I stopped and looked at the big house．Mr Duncan was working in the garden in front of it．At first，he didn't see me．
　　‘I'm going to take a photograph of the house，’I thought．‘The sun is in just the right place， and it will make a good picture．’
　　I looked at the building through my camera，and took the photograph．Mr Ross was coming out of a door．He was in my picture，too，and he looked angry．
　　‘That's all right，’I thought．‘It's still a good photograph．’
　　But Mr Duncan was running across the grass．He came quickly up to me and said，‘Give me your camera．’He looked very worried．
　　‘Wbat's wrong？’I asked in surprise．I gave him the camera．
　　‘Never take photographs of Mr Ross，’he said．And then he opened the back of my camera and took out the film．
　　‘Hey！What are you doing？’I said．‘You'll spoil my film！’
　　But he didn't stop．‘Sorry，’he said， and he put the film into his pocket．‘But no pictures of Mr Ross． He doesn't like people to take pictures of him．’
　　Mr Ross was watching us．He saw the camera and he saw Mr Duncan take out the film，but he said nothing．Then he turned and went back into the house．
　　Later，I told my mother about Mr Duncan and the camera．‘He spoiled my film，’I said．
　　‘I don't understand，'she said．‘Why did he do that？’
　　‘I don't know，’I said，‘but there's something strange about Mr Ross．’
　　About a week later，I finished work early one day and came back to the house．My mother was working in her small room，next to Mr Ross's office． Mrs Duncan was in the kitchen．Greta Ross was painting in her room upstairs．
　　I went to my room and began reading a book．I was sitting beside the window．After half an hour，I got tired of reading．I looked out at the rain，and the grey sea and rocks between the trees．
　　‘My book isn't very interesting，’I thought．
　　I got up and went out of my room．I walked along the passage and turned a corner．Then I saw the door at the end of the passage．There was a large plant in a plant pot outside the door．
　　‘Where dogs that door go？’I thought．‘I haven't seen it before．’I remembered the face at the window in my first week on the island．‘Perhaps it's the door to that room，’I thought．
　　I walked along to the door and turned the handle．The door didn't move．It was locked．
　　‘What are you doing？'said a voice behind me．
　　I turned round quickly and saw Greta Ross．She looked angry．
　　‘That room is private，'she said．
　　‘I'm sorry，’I said．‘I didn't—’
　　‘Stay away from there，'she told me．
　　I told my mother about the locked door．
　　‘What's behind it？’I said．‘Is it a secret？’
　　‘I don't know，'said my mother．‘It doesn't matter．Mr Ross can have locked rooms if he wants them．’
　　‘I think he does have secrets，’I said．‘There's something strange about him There's something strange about this island．Somebody isn't telling us something．Something important．’
　　My mother laughed．‘Stop playing detective，Carol，'she said．






■ 4 The Locked Room
　　Two days 1ater there was a storm in the middle of the night．
　　I was hot and I couldn't sleep．I got out of bed，went across to the window and looked out at the night．Black clouds hur ried across the sky，and the trees moved wildly in the wind．The rain made a loud noise on the window．
　　I opened my window and put my head out into the wind and the rain．I looked at the other windows in the house．Most of them were dark．But one window had a light in it．‘Somebody isn't sleeping，’I thought．‘Which room is that？’
　　There were six windows between my window and the room with the light．
　　‘And there are six doors between my room and the locked door！’I thought．‘That light is in the locked room．Somebody's in there！’
　　I put on my dressing－gown and went out of my room．The house was dark，and at first I couldn't see very well．I walked along the passage and turned the corner．
　　There it was， the locked room．And there was a light under the door！
　　I went nearer and heard noises．
　　‘Somebody's moving about in the locked room’，I thought．‘Who is it？’
　　Then the light went off and the door opened．
　　I was afraid to move．
　　Somebody came out of the room， and into the dark passage．Lightning suddenly lit up the house，and I saw who it was．
　　‘It's Mr Ross！’I thought．‘What was he doing in that room in the middle of the night？’
　　I didn't move and he didn't see me． He locked the door of the room carefully．He didn't put the key in his pocket，but hid it in the plant pot next to the door．
　　‘He's coming along here，’I thought．‘I must get back to my room．’
　　And I ran back along the passage．
　　Mr Ross heard me ．‘Who's that？’he called．
　　I didn't answer，but ran into my room and closed the door．
　　He came along the passage and stopped outside my door．Then he walked past and went on down the stairs．
　　I took off my dressing－gown and went back to bed． I was shaking because I was afraid．
　　‘Now I know how to get into the locked room，’I thought．‘But what's in there？’
　　There was no storm in the morning，but it was still raining．I got up early and worked on the farm．There were eggs from the chickens and I put them in boxes．I helped to milk the cows and then took them out to the field．
　　Later，I went back into the house for breakfast．‘Did you sleep all right last night？’asked Mrs Duncan．‘Or did the storm wake you up？’
　　‘I… slept all right，’I said．I didn't want to tell her about the light in the locked room，or about Mr Ross．
　　After breakfast，I went back upstairs．Mr Ross was talking on the telephone in his office．My mother was working at her desk．I knew that Mrs Duncan was in the kitchen and that Mr Duncan was working in the garden．
　　‘Where's Mrs Ross？’I thought．
　　Then I looked out of the window and saw her with Tony Duncan．They were walking to the boat．
　　‘He's taking her out in the boat，’I thought．‘Perhaps she's going to Edinburgh．’
　　The boat moved away from the island and I waited until it was out at sea．Then I opened the door of my room．
　　There was nobody in the passage and I ran along to the locked room．The key was still in the plant pot and I took it out．My hand was shaking．
　　Then I unlocked the door．






■ 5 A Dead Man
　　I went into the room… and I was very surprised．
　　The room was full of strange things．Coloured shirts and suits．Three guitars．And there were posters and photographs on the walls．
　　I looked at the posters．
　　Jake Rosso's face looked down at me．
　　I looked at the dead Jake Rosso's pictures，and I remembered all the photographs on the walls of my room in Hong Kong．I could never forget that face—the face of my favourite singer．
　　Then，while I looked at his face，something strange happened．I began to see another face in the posters．An older face，and with a moustache，but the same face．
　　I saw the face of Mr Ross．
　　‘No！’I said．‘It's not true！’
　　But it was，I knew it was．
　　‘Mr Ross is…Jake Rosso！’
　　‘No！'said a voice behind me．
　　I turned round and saw Mr Ross．He was standing in the doorway．He looked…afraid．
　　‘I don't believe you！’I said．
　　‘You have to believe me！’
　　I looked at the posters．‘Who is that，if it's not you？’
　　‘It's Jake Rosso．He was… my brother．’
　　‘That's not true！I shouted．‘I don't believe you．Listen，Jake Rosso was my favourite singer—I had hundreds of pho tos of him．I still have all his records．I loved him，do you understand？Thousands of people loved him．’
　　‘He's dead，'mr Ross said quietly．
　　‘No！’I shouted．‘You're Jake Rosso！You look different now，yes．You've got short hair，you've got a moustache now，and you wear glasses．But you're… Jake… Rosso．You were my favourite pop star， so I know．’
　　Mr Ross said nothing，and watched my face．
　　‘He doesn't know what to do，’I thought．‘He knows I don't believe him，and he's afraid．’
　　Then he said，‘It was you in the passage last night，wasn't it？’
　　‘Yes，’I answered．
　　He looked angry．‘I was wrong to give your mother a job，’he said．‘I thought it was OK because you came from Hong Kong．And I needed help with my work．I needed a good secretary．’
　　‘Does your other secretary know who you are？’I asked．‘Do the other people on the island know？’
　　Mr Ross didn't answer，but walked across to the window．He was thinking．
　　‘What's he going to do？’I thought．
　　Then he turned round．‘OK，you're right．I…I am Jake Rosso．’
　　‘I knew it！’
　　He looked worried and unhappy．‘Can you keep a secret？A very important secret？’
　　I thought for a minute，then I said，‘Yes，I can keep a secret．’
　　Then he told me：
　　‘The other people on this island are my family．’
　　‘Your family？’I said．
　　‘Yes．My real name is James Duncan，and Mr and Mrs Duncan are my father and mother．Tony is my younger brother，and his wife， Lisa，is my secretary．It's she who's in hospital．’
　　‘And Stella and Dan Parks？’I asked．
　　‘My mother's sister and her husband，’he said．
　　‘But what are you doing here on this island？I don't understand．’
　　‘I'11 tell you，’he said．He sat down on a chair and took a guitar in his hands，but he didn't play it．‘You were right．I was a famous pop star．I was very rich，and I had a beautiful wife．But things went wrong．’
　　‘How？’
　　‘I took drugs，’he said．‘I drank a lot of alcohol．I got drunk and crashed cars．I did stupid，terrible things．I knew it was wrong but I couldn't stop doing it．I was… crazy，for a time．’
　　‘I can understand that，’I told him．‘I've taken drugs，too．
　　He looked surprised．‘You have？’
　　‘Yes，’I said．‘After my father died，I was very unhappy and things went wrong for me too．But go on with your story．’
　　He went on．‘One night，I was driving my car．I was drunk and— and I hit somebody．A young girl．She…died．I killed her．’
　　‘Oh，no！’
　　‘Yes，’he said．‘She was fifteen years old．I wanted to die，too．The money didn't matter any more．Nothing mat tered any more．’
　　‘What did you do after the accident？’I asked．
　　‘I drove on in the car．I didn't stop，and I didn't tell the police．I had killed someone and I was afraid．’He looked afraid now．He put the guitar down and went on with his story．‘So I made a plan．Jake Rosso had to die，too．It was the best thing to do．And so… I “killed” him．’
　　‘But you're still alive．’
　　‘My family know I'm alive， but no other people know．’He looked at me．‘But now you know．’
　　‘How did you do it？’I asked．
　　‘I told my family about my p1an and I told Greta，my wife．At first they didn't like it．But after a long time，they said OK．Then I faked the car crash．’
　　‘Faked it？’
　　‘Yes，’he said．‘I put some of my things in the car．A guitar，and some clothes．Then I pushed my car over a cliff and burned it．The police found the burned car and thought I was dead．Everybody thought I was killed in the car crash．’
　　‘But you faked the crash，’I said．
　　‘Yes．’
　　‘What did you do then？’
　　‘My family hid me away for months．I tried to change into a different person— with shorter hair，a moustache， quiet suits．All my money went to Greta and she changed her name to Ross．I told her to buy this island．Now I invest her money，the money that was mine．And now I'm “James Ross．”
　　‘What about“Jake Rosso”？’I asked．
　　‘Jake Rosso took drugs，’he said．‘Jake Rosso got drunk and crashed cars． He killed a young girl，so he had to “die”．I can never forget the girl．I think about her every day．’
　　‘And that's why you always look so sad，’I thought．
　　I looked around the room．‘Why do you keep a room like this？ Why do you keep the guitars，the posters and photographs？’
　　James Ross did not speak for a minute．Then he said，‘I need to remember my old life， and what Jake Rosso was like．I'm never going to sing again and I'm never going to take drugs But I need this room，to remember．’
　　I looked at the posters and the photographs．And I looked at his sad face．‘I'm not going to say anything．I won't tell my mother，I won't tell anybody．’
　　James Ross looked at me．‘I think you understand，’he said．
　　‘I do，’I said．‘I've done bad things．I want to forget them，too．I needed to get away，to hide，too．That's why we came to England，to begin a new life Yes，I understatld．’
　　He took my hand，and we walked out of the room and closed the door．
　　I never went into the room again，and I didn't tell anybody．
　　My mother and I left the island at the end of the summer．Soon after，I went to college．
　　My life is bettter now．I work on a farm in England and my mother works in an office． My mother doesn't worry about me，because I'm happier now．
　　I haven't been back to the island．
　　But I know there's a ‘dead man’living there．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain





■ 1 Huck in trouble
　　You don't know about me if you haven't read a book called The Adventures of Tom Sawyer．Mr Mark Twain wrote the book and most of it is true．In that book robbers stole some money and hid it in a very secret place in the woods．But Tom Sawyer and I found it，and after that we were rich．We got six thousand dollars each-all gold．
　　In those days I never had a home or went to school like Tom and all the other boys in St Petersburg．Pop was always drunk，and he moved around a lot，so he wasn't a very good father．But it didn't matter to me．I slept in the streets or in the woods，and I could do what I wanted，when I wanted．It was a fine life．
　　When we got all that money，Tom and I were famous for a while．Judge Thatcher，who was an important man in our town，kept my money in the bank for me． And the Widow Douglas took me to live in her house and said I could be her son． She was very nice and kind，but it was a hard life because I had to wear new clothes and be good all the time．
　　In the end，I put on my old clothes and ran away．But Tom came after me and said that I had to go back，but that I could be in his gang of robbers．So，I went back，and the widow cried and I had to put on those new clothes again．I didn't like it at all．Her sister，Miss Watson，lived there too．She was al-ways saying，'Don't put your feet there，Huckleberry，'and 'Don't do that，Huckleberry．'It was terrible．
　　When I went up to bed that night，I sat down in a chair by the window． I sat there a good long time， and I was really unhappy．But just after midnight I heard 'mee－yow！mee－yow！'ortside．Very softly，I answered，'mee－yow！mee－yor！' Quietly，I put out the light and got out through the window．In the trees， Tom Sawyer was waiting for me．
　　We went through the trees to the end of the widow's garden．Soon we were on top of a hill on the other side of the house．Below us we could see the river and the town．One or two lights were still on，but everything was quiet． We went down the hill and found Joe Harper， Ben Rogers and two or three more of the boys．Then Tom took us down the river by boat to his secret place，which was a cave deep in the side of a hill．When we got there， Tom told us all his plan．
　　'Now，we'll have this gang of robbers，'he said，'and we'll call it Tom Sawyer's Gang．If somebody hurts one of us，the others will kill him and his family． And if a boy from the gang tells other people our secrets，we'll kill him and his family，too．'
　　We all thought this was wonderful，and we wrote our names in blood from our fingers．Then Ben Rogers said，'Now， what's the gang going to do？'
　　'Nothing，'replied Tom．'Just rob and kill． We stop people on the road，and we kill them，and take their money and things．But we can keep a few of the people，and then their friends can pay money to get them back．That's what they do in the stories in books．'
　　But Ben wasn't happy．'What about women？'he asked． ' Do we kill them，too
'
　　'Oh，no，'Tom answered．'We're very nice to them， and they all love us， and they don't want to go home．'
　　'Then the cave will be full of women， and people waiting，and we'll have to watch them all night…'
　　'We'll all go home now，'Tom said，'and we'll meet next week， and we'll kill somebody and rob somebody．'
　　Ben wanted to begin on Sunday，but the others said no．It was bad to kill and rob on a Sunday．
　　My clothes were very dirty and I was very tired when I got back．Of course，the next morning Miss Watson was angry with me because of my dirty clothes，but the widow just looked unhappy．Soon after that we stopped playing robbers because we never robbed people and we never killed them．
　　* * *
　　Time went on and winter came．I went to school most of the time and I was learning to read and write a little．It wasn't too bad，and the widow was pleased with me．Miss Watson had a slave，an old man called Jim，and he and I were good friends．I often sat talking to Jim，but I still didn't like living in a house and sleeping in a bed．
　　Then，one morning，there was some new snow on the ground and outside the back garden I could see footprints in the snow． I went out to look at them more carefully．They were Pop's footprints！
　　A minute later，I was running down the hill to Judge Thatcher's house． When he opened the door，I cried，'Sir，I want you to take all my money．I want to give it to you．'
　　He looked surprised．'Why，what's the matter？'
　　'Please，sir，take it！ Don't ask me why！'
　　In the end he said，'Well，you can sell it to me，then．'And he gave me a dollar and I wrote my name on a piece of paper for him．
　　That night when I went up to my room，Pop was sitting there， waiting for me！I saw that the window was open，so that was how he got in．
　　He was almost fifty and he looked old．His hair was long and dirty and his face was a terrible white colour．His clothes were old and dirty，too，and two of his toes were coming through his shoe．He looked at me all over for a long time，and then he said，' Well，just look at those Clean，tidy clothes！And they say you can read and write now． Who said you could go to school？'
　　'The widow…'I began．
　　'Oh， she did， did she？ Well， you can forget about school．I can't read and your mother couldn't read；no one in our family could read before they died，so who do you think you are？ Go on，take that book and read to me！'
　　I began to read， but he hit the book and it flew out of my hand，across the room．Then he shouted，'They say you're rich—how's that？'
　　'It isn't true！'
　　'You give me that money！I want it．Get it for me tomorrow！'
　　I haven't got any money．Ask Judge Thatcher．He'll tell you．I haven't got any money．'
　　'Well， give me what you've got in your pocket now．Come on， give it to me！'
　　'I've only got a dollar， and I want that to…'
　　'Give it to me，do you hear？'
　　He took it，and then he said he was going out to get a drink．When he was outside the window， he put his head back in and shouted，'And stop going to that school， or you know what you'll get！'
　　The next day he was drunk，and he went to Judge Thatcher to get my money．The judge wouldn't give it to him．But Pop didn't stop trying and every few days I got two or three dollars from the judge to stop Pop from hitting me．But when Pop had money， he got drunk again and made trouble in town．He was always coming to the widow's house，and she got angry and told him to stay away．Then Pop got really angry and one day he caught me and took me a long way up the river in a boat．I had to stay with him in a hut in the woods and I couldn't go out by myself．He watched me all the time． The widow sent a man to find me and bring me home，but Pop went after him with a gun， and the man ran away．



　　* * *



■ 2 Huck escapes and finds a friend
　　Mostly it was a lazy，comfortable kind of life，but after about two months Pop began to hit me too much with his stick．He often went away into town too，and then he always locked me in the hut．Once he was away for three days and I thought I was never going to get out again．
　　When he came back that time，he was drunk and angry．He wanted my money，but Judge Thatcher wouldn't give it to him．The judge wanted to send me to live with the widow again，Pop told me．I wasn't very pleased about that．I didn't want to go back there．
　　So I decided to escape and go down the river and live in the woods somewhere． When Pop was out，I began to cut a hole in the wooden wall of the hut． In a few days，when the hole was bigger，I could take the wood cut， escape through the hole，and put the wood back．
　　One morning Pop sent me down to the river to catch some fish for breakfast．To my surprise， there was a canoe in the water and there was no one in it．Immediately，I jumped into the river and brought the canoe to the side． It was lucky that Pop didn't see me，and I decided to hide the canoe under some trees and use it when I escaped．
　　That afternoon，Pop locked me in and went off to town．'He won't be back tonight，'I thought， so I began to work hard at my hole．Soon I could get out through it，and I carried food and drink and Pop's gun down to the canoe．Then I put back the wood to hide the hole，took the gun and went into the woods．There I shot a wild pig and took it back to the hut with me．Next，I broke down the door with an axe．I carried the pig into the hut and put some of its blood on the ground． Then I put some big stones in a sack and pulled it along behind me to the river．Last of all，I put some blood and some of my hair on the axe．I left the axe in a corner of the hut and I took the pig down to the river．
　　'They won't know it's only a pig in the river，'I said to myself．'They'll think it's me．'
　　Then I took the canoe and went down the river to Jackson's Island． By then it was nearly dark， so I hid the canoe under some trees and went to sleep．
　　It was after eight o'clock when I woke up the next day and the sun was high in the sky．I was warm and comfortable and I didn't want to get up．Suddenly，I heard a noise up the river．Carefully，I looked through the trees，and I saw a boat full of people．There was Pop，Judge Thatcher，Tom Sawyer and his Aunt Polly and his brother Sid， and lots of others． They were looking for my body in the river． I watched them， but they didn't see me， and in the end they went away．I knew that nobody was going to come and look for me again．I found a good place under the trees to sleep and to put my things．Then I caught a fish and cooked it over a fire．
　　I lived like that for three days， and then I decided to have a look round the island． So I went into the woods．'This is my island，'I thought．'I'm the only person on it．'
　　Suddenly，just in front of me，I saw a fire，and it was still smoking．There was somebody on my island！I didn't wait． I turned and went straight back．But I couldn't sleep．After a time，I said to myself，'I can't live like this．I must find out who it is．'
　　Silently， I moved along the river in my canoe，under the darkness of the trees．And then I stopped．Through the trees I could see the light of a fire． Afraid， I left my canoe and went nearer．There was a man lying by the fire．Suddenly，he sat up and I saw that it was Jim，Miss Watson's slave！I was really happy to see him！'Hello，Jim，' I cried，and I jumped out from behind the tree．
　　Jim fell to his knees．'Please don't hurt me！' he cried． 'I've always been good to dead people！'
　　'It's all right，Jim．I'm not dead，' I said．'But why are you here on the island？' I asked．
　　'Well， Huck，' he began．'Old Miss Watson wanted to sell me． A man came into town and told Miss Watson that he'd buy me for eight hundred dollars．She couldn't say no， so I ran away．I ran down to the river to hide，but everybody in the town was there． They said you were dead， Huck．I had to wait all day to get away．When it was dark，I got on to a big boat and hid． When we came near this island， I jumped into the water and swam here．'
　　Jim finished his story and then we both carried all our things into a cave and hid the canoe under some trees．We were just in time because then the rains came． It rained for days，and the river got higher and higher． All kinds of things came down the river and one night there was a little wooden house， lying half on its side． We got the canoe out and went to take a look．Through the window we could see a bed，two old chairs and some old clothes．There was something lying in the corner and we thought it looked like a man．Jim went in to see， but he said，'He's dead．Someone shot him in the back．Don't look at his face，Huck．It's terrible！'
　　I didn't want to see the dead man's face，so I didn't look．We just took the old clothes and a few other things，and went back to our cave on the island．
　　Another night，when we were out looking for things on the river，we found a raft．It was made of good， strong wood，and was about four metres by five metres．'This could be useful，'I said to Jim， so we pulled it back to the island behind the canoe， and tied it up under the trees．






■ 3 Huck and Jim travel south
　　For some days everything went along quietly，but we were getting bored． We wanted to know what was happening in town and so I decided to go and find out． Jim said，'Why don't you wear the old dress and the hat that we found in the house？ People won't know you， then． They'll think you're a girl．' And so I did．
　　Just after it was dark，I got into the canoe and went up the river to the bottom of the town．There，I left the canoe and went on foot． Before long， I came to a little house which was always empty．Now there was a light on，and when I looked through the window， I saw a woman of about forty．She was a stranger and that was good because she didn't know me．So I knocked on the door．'I must remember that I'm a girl'I said to myself．
　　The woman opened the door．'Come in，' she said．She looked at me with her little bright eyes．'What's your name？'she asked．
　　'Sarah Williams，'I replied．'I'm going to see my uncle，on the other side of town．My mother's ill， you see，and she needs help．'
　　'Well， you can't go there by yourself now．It's too dark．My husband will be home in about an hour． Wait for him and he'll walk with you．'
　　And then she began to tell me about all her troubles． I was getting bored with all this until she said something about Pop and my murder．
　　'Who did it？'I asked．
　　'Well，'she replied，'some people say old Finn did it him-self；other people think it was a slave who ran away that night．His name was Jim． They'll give three hundred dollars to anybody who finds him——and they'll give two hundred dollars for old Finn． He got drunk and left town with two strangers．A lot of people think he killed his boy and he's going to come back one day， and get all Huck Finn's money．' 'And what about the slave？'I asked．
　　'Oh，they'll soon catch him． People want the three hundred dollars． I think he's on Jackson's Island， you know．I've seen smoke there．My husband's gone to get two of his friends and they're going over there with a gun later tonight．'
　　When I heard this， my hands began to shake． The woman looked at me strangely，but then she smiled and said kindly，'What did you say your name was？'
　　'M－Mary Williams．'
　　'Oh，' she said，'I thought it was Sarah．'
　　'Er… well， yes， it is． Sarah Mary Williams． Some people call me Sarah and some people call me Mary， you see．'
　　'Oh，do they？'She smiled again．'Come on，now—what's your real name？ Bill？ Bob？ I know you're not really a girl．'
　　So then I had to tell her another story， with a different name，and I said I was running away． She said she wouldn't tell anybody， and gave me some food before I left．I hurried back to the island and Jim．
　　'Quick，Jim！'I cried，waking him up．'They're coming to get us！'
　　We got out the raft as fast as we could，put all our things on it， tied the canoe on behind， and moved off down the river．When it began to get light，we hid． When it was dark again，we travelled on． On the fifth night we passed St Louis， and we decided to go on down to Cairo in Illinois，sell the raft there and get a boat to Ohio．There are no slaves in Ohio．
　　We slept for most of that day and we began our journey again when it was dark．After some time，we saw lights on the Illinois side of the river and Jim got very excited． He thought it was Cairo． Jim got the canoe ready and I went off in it to take a look at those lights． But it wasn't Cairo．
　　After that， we went on down the river． It was very dark that night and it wasn't easy to see where we were going．Suddenly， a big steamboat came at us very fast， and the next minute it was right over us． Jim and I jumped off the raft into the water． The boat hit the raft and went on up the river．
　　When I came up out of the water， I couldn't see Jim any-where．I called out his name again and again，but there was no answer．'He's dead！' I thought．Slowly， I swam to the side of the river and got out．I saw that I was near a big old wood-en house． Suddenly a lot of very angry dogs jumped out at me．They made a terrible noise and someone called from the house，'Who's there？'
　　'George Jackson，'I answered quickly．'I've fallen off a river boat．'
　　Well， the people who lived in that house were very kind，and they took me in and gave me some new clothes and a good meal． I told them that my family were all dead，so they said I could stay with them as long as I wanted． It was a beautiful house and the food was good there， so I stayed．
　　A few days later one of the slaves in the house came to me and said，'Come with me！'Together，we went down to some trees by the river．'In there！'he said and went away．
　　On the ground， I found a man， asleep． It was Jim！ I was really pleased to see him．When the steamboat hit the raft，Jim told me， the raft didn't break up．Jim swam after it and caught it． Then he began to look for me．
　　We decided to leave at once． It's all right living in a house for a little while， but you feel more free and easy and comfort-able on a raft．






■ 4 The Duke and the King
　　Two or three days and nights went by and nothing much happened．We travelled at night when it was dark and everybody was asleep． We didn't want anyone to see Jim and ask questions about him．
　　Then， one morning，just after it was light，I found a little canoe，so I got into it and went over to the side of the river．I was looking round，when，suddenly，two men ran through the trees．
　　'Help！' they cried．'There are men and dogs trying to catch us． But we've done nothing wrong！'
　　One of the men was about seventy years old；the other was about thirty，and they both had very old， dirty clothes． I said they could come with me， and we ran quickly back to the canoe．
　　Back on the raft we talked for a time and then the young man said，'My friends，I think I can tell you my secret now．I'm really a duke．My grandfather was the son of the Duke of Bridgewater，but he left England and came to America．When the old Duke died，my grandfather's younger brother stole everything and made himself the Duke of Bridgewater．'
　　Well，of course，we were all very unhappy for our friend the Duke，but he said，'I'll be happier if you do things for me．Bring me my dinner！'
　　So we did things for him，and he liked it． But the old man spoke very little and he looked unhappy，too．After a time he said，'You know，Bridgewater，I， too， have a secret．'And he began to cry．
　　'What do you mean？'the Duke asked．'What's your secret？'
　　And then the old man told us that he was really the first son of the King of France．He asked us all to go down on one knee when we spoke to him． we could call him'Your Majesty'，too．So that was what we did， and they were both happy．Of course，I knew that they weren't really a duke and a king， but I didn't tell Jim．It's best if everybody is happy when you're living together on a raft．
　　The King and the Duke were very interested in Jim．'Is he a slave？'they wanted to know．'Is he running away？'
　　I had to tell them something， so I said that Jim belonged to my uncle and was taking me to my family in New Orleans．
　　'Well，we'll travel down river with you，then，'said the King．'We'll have a fine time together．'
　　So the four of us went on down the river， but Jim and I didn't like those two men．They were always getting drunk and making plans to get money out of people in every town．It's all right to take a chicken or something if you're hungry，but these men were really bad！ Jim and I decided to get away from them as soon as we could．It wasn't easy because they wanted to be with us all the time．
　　Then one morning the King went off into a town and told us to wait for him． We waited all morning and he didn't come back，so the Duke and I went into town to look for him． We looked all afternoon and in the end we found him in a bar， drunk，and then he and the Duke began to fight about some money．
　　Now we can get away from them，I thought．I turned and ran back to the river．'Quick，Jim！' I shouted．'It's time to go！'But there was no answer． Jim wasn't there！
　　I ran into the woods，crying and shouting Jim's name． But there was still no answer．
　　Just then a boy came along．'Have you seen a slave？'I asked him，and I described Jim．
　　'Why，yes，'the boy replied．'He's a runaway slave．I heard all about it in town．A family called the Phelpses have got him now．An old man in a bar told Mr Phelps that there was a runaway slave on a raft down by the river． He said he hadn't got time to take the slave back himself．So Mr Phelps gave him forty dollars and they went down and caught the slave this afternoon．The Phelpses are going to take him back to his owner， and they'll get three hundred dollars for him！'
　　I knew those two men were bad！ I asked the boy where the Phelpses lived and he said it was a big white house a little way down the river．
　　I began to make plans to get Jim back．First，I took the raft and went down to a little island．I hid the raft under the treesand lay down to sleep．Before it was light，I went off down the river in the canoe．When I thought I was near the Phelpses place，I stopped，got out of the canoe and went up to the house．Suddenly，a lot of dogs ran out．They came from everywhere and they made a terrible noise．
　　A woman about fifty years old ran out of the house，with some little children behind her．She was smiling all over her face and she took me by the hands and cried，'It's you，at last，isn't it？'
　　I didn't stop to think．'Yes，ma'am，'I said．
　　'Well， what took you so long？ We thought you were coming two days ago． Your Uncle Silas goes to town every day to meet you．He's there now，but he'll be back soon．'She didn't stop talking and I couldn't tell her that she was making a mistake．' Tell us all about them，'she cried．'Tell me everything．'
　　I knew then that I had to tell her… but just then she cried，'Here he is！Quick，hide！'and she pushed me inside the house and behind the front door．Then her husband came in and she asked him，'Has he come？'
　　'No，'her husband replied．
　　'Look！'she shouted，and then she pulled me out from be-hind the door．
　　'Why，who's that？'Mr Phelps cried，surprised．
　　'It's Tom Sawyer！'she laughed．






■ 5 The plan to free Jim
　　When I heard that，I nearly fell through the floor，but it was a big piece of luck．It was easy for me to be Tom Sawyer because Tom was my best friend．He and his brother Sid lived with their Aunt Polly up in St Petersburg， and I knew all about them．Now I learnt that Aunt Polly had a sister，who was Mrs Phelps．She and her husband were Tom's Aunt Sally and Uncle Silas．And Tom was coming down south by boat to stay with them for a bit．
　　We all sat there talking and I could answer all their questions about the Sawyer family．I was feeling really happy about this when suddenly I heard a boat on the river．'Tom could be on that boat，'I thought，'and he's going to walk in here and call out my name before I can stop him．I've got to go and meet him．'
　　So I told the Phelpses that I would go into town to get my bags， which were at the boat station．I hurried up the road and before I was halfway to town，there was Tom Sawyer coming along．
　　When he saw me， his mouth fell open and he looked a bit white in the lace．'Aren't you dead？'he said．'Everybody said that you were murdered！'
　　'I'm not dead yet，'I said，'but listen…'I told him about my adventures，and Tom loved all that．Then I told him about the Phelpses and that they thought I was Tom Sawyer．'What shall we do？'I asked him．
　　Tom thought for a bit，and then he said，'I know．You take my bags and say they're yours． I'll come to the house in about half an hour．'
　　'All right，'I said，'but there's another thing．You know old Miss Watson's slave Jim， who ran away？ Well，he's a prisoner here，and I'm going to help him escape．'
　　'Jim？'Tom said．'But he's—'Then he stopped and thought．'Right．I'll help，too，I'll make a really good plan．'He looked very excited．
　　So I went back to the house with the bags，and Tom came along half an hour later．He knocked on the door and when his Aunt Sally opened it， he said he was Sid， Tom's brother．He wanted his visit to be a surprise for his dear old Aunt Sally，he said．
　　Well，Aunt Sally was very pleased to see Tom and Sid．She thought it was wonderful．She and Uncle Silas were really nice people．
　　When we were alone later，Tom and I talked about Jim's escape．I said I had a plan，and Tom listened to it．
　　'It's a good plan，'he said when I finished．'But it's too easy！ It's got to be a real escape，like a real adventure in a sto-ry-book．So we want something difficult and dangerous．
　　Now，listen to this…'
　　So he told me his plan．I knew it would be a good one be-cause Tom's plans are always crazy and exciting．
　　And we sure had a lot of fun with that plan！We knew that Jim was locked up in a hut outside the house．Every night we got out through our bedroom window and dug a hole right under the wall of the hut．It took us a week，and it was hard work．We talked to Jim secretly and told him about the plan，and he was really pleased．
　　We also wrote secret letters to everybody．Tom said that people always do this in books．We wrote that there was a gang of slave-thieves coming up from the south．They wanted to steal Jim and get the three hundred dollars from his owner．Well，the Phelpses and their friends got very excited， and on the night of the escape I went into the sitting-room，and there was a crowd of men in there—all with guns！
　　I ran and told Tom， and he said that this was really good．'It's a real adventure now， all right，'he said， very excited．'Perhaps they'll come after us，and shoot，and we'll all get killed！'
　　Well，there wasn't time to think about it because it all happened so quickly．We got Jim out through the hole under the wall，and began to run down to the river．But the men heard us and came after us．They began to shoot，and so we ran as fast as we could to the canoe．We got in it and went over to Spanish Island．My raft was there，and our plan was to escape on that and go on down river．
　　'Now，Jim，'I cried，'you're a free man！'We were all very happy，but Tom was the happiest of all，because he had a bullet in his leg．
　　When Jim and I heard that，we weren't so happy．Tom wanted the adventure to go on， but Jim and I said that a doctor must look at Tom's leg．Tom was getting angry about this，but Jim said：
　　'You listen to me，Tom Sawyer．You say I'm a free man now，and perhaps I am．But old Jim is not going to run away and leave one of his friends with a bullet in his leg！ So I'm staying right here until a doctor comes．'
　　I knew Jim would say that． He was a good， true friend， and you can't say that about many people．
　　Well，that was the end of the adventure，really．I went and found a doctor in the town．He was a kind old man，and he said he would go over to the island． But Tom's leg got very bad，and the next day the doctor and some other men carried Tom home to the Phelpses' house．They brought Jim too， and they locked him up in the hut again．But the doctor said，'Be kind to him， because he didn't run away and he stayed to help me with the boy．'
　　They took Tom up to bed because his leg was really bad，and Aunt Sally sat with him while he slept．I didn't want to answer any questions so I kept out of everybody's way．
　　When Tom woke up the next day，he felt better．I was in the room and he said to me，'Jim's all right，isn't he？'
　　I didn't know what to say because Aunt Sally was listening， and before I could stop him，Tom went on：
　　'We did it，Aunt Sally．Me and Tom here．We helped Jim escape．'He told her all about the digging and everything，and Aunt Sally's mouth was opening and closing like a fish．Then she got really angry with Tom．
　　'That slave is locked up again and he's going to stay there．And if I catch you again—'
　　Tom suddenly sat up in bed．'You can't do that！'he cried．'Jim was old Miss Watson's slave， but she died two months ago．Before she died，she wrote that she wanted Jim to be free，and not a slave any more．Jim's a free man，not a slave！
　　Well，that was a surprise to me and Aunt Sally！She thought Tom was crazy．'But Sid，why did you help him to escape，if he was free already？'she said．
　　'I wanted the adventure，of course！'said Tom．'We made a really exciting plan and… Oh my！…AUNT POLLY！'
　　We turned round，and there was Tom's Aunt Polly in the doorway！That was the second big surprise．Aunt Sally was really pleased to see her sister，and jumped up to put her arms round her． I got under the bed as fast as I could．There was trouble coming for me and Tom， that was for sure．
　　Then Aunt Polly said to Tom，'You always were a terrible boy，Tom Sawyer，and I want to know—'
　　'But Polly dear，'said Aunt Sally，'this isn't Tom．It's Sid．Tom was here a minute ago．Where is he？'
　　'Where's Huck Finn，you mean，' replied Aunt Polly．'Come out from under that bed， Huck Finn．'
　　So Tom and I had to explain everything．Aunt Polly said that Aunt Sally wrote and told her that Tom and Sid were there．She knew that it wasn't true， so she decided to come and find out what was happening．But she said that it was true about Miss Watson and that Jim was a free man now．
　　We got Jim out of the hut and Aunt Sally and Uncle Silas were really nice to him．Later，Tom， Jim and I had a long talk by ourselves．Tom talked and talked，and then he said，'Let's all three of us run away one night，and go and have ad-ventures in the wild country down south．'
　　It sounded like a good plan to me．'The only thing is，'I said，'I haven't got any money to buy the right clothes and things．All my money back in St Petersburg will be in Pop's pockets by now．'
　　'No，'said Tom．'Your money's all there．Your Pop never came back．'
　　'No，and he won't come back，Huck，'Jim said．'You remember that dead man on the river，when I said“Don't look at his face”？Well，that was your Pop．You can get your money when you want．'
　　Tom's leg is almost better now， and I haven't got any more to write about．I'm really pleased about that because it was very difficult to write a book and I won't do it again．But I think I'm going to have to run away before the others，because Aunt Sally wants me to live with her． I'll have to sleep in a bed and wear clean clothes and learn to be good，and I can't do that again．I've done it once already．
　　The End
　　Yours Truly
　　Huck Finn




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Robinson Cruso by Daniel Defoe





■ 1 My first sea journey
　　Before I begin my story，I would like to tell you a little about myself.
　　I was born in the year 1632，in the city of York in the north of England. My father was German，but he came to live and work in England. Soon after that，he married my mother，who was English. Her family name was Robinson，so，when I was born，they called me Robinson，after her.
　　My father did well in his business and I went to a good school. He wanted me to get a good job and live a quiet，com-fortable life. But I didn't want that. I wanted adventure and an exciting life.
　　'I want to be a sailor and go to sea，'I told my mother and father. They were very unhappy about this.
　　'Please don't go，'my father said. 'You won't be happy，you know. Sailors have a difficult and dangerous life. 'And be－cause I loved him，and he was unhappy，I tried to forget about the sea.
　　But I couldn't forget，and about a year later，I saw a friend in town. His father had a ship，and my friend said to me，'We're sailing to London tomorrow. Why don't you come with us？'
　　And so，on September 1st，1651，I went to Hull，and the next day we sailed for London.
　　But，a few days later，there was a strong wind. The sea was rough and dangerous，and the ship went up and down，up and down. I was very ill，and very afraid.
　　'Oh，I don't want to die！'I cried. 'I want to live！If I live，I'll go home and never go to sea again！'
　　The next day the wind dropped，and the sea was quiet and be autiful again.
　　'Well，Bob，'my friend laughed. 'How do you feel now？The wind wasn't too bad. '
　　'What！'I cried. 'It was a terrible storm. '
　　'Oh，that wasn't a storm，'my friend answered. 'Just a lit－tle wind. Forget it. Come and have a drink. '
　　After a few drinks with my friend，I felt better. I forgot about the danger and decided not to go home. I didn't want my friends and family to laugh at me！
　　I stayed in London for some time，but I still wanted to go to sea. So，when the captain of a ship asked me to go with him to Guinea in Africa，I agreed. And so I went to sea for the second time.
　　It was a good ship and everything went well at first，but I was very ill again. Then，when we were near the Canary Is-lands，a Turkish pirate ship came after us. They were famous thieves of the sea at that time. There was a long，hard fight，but when it finished，we and the ship were prisoners.
　　The Turkish captain and his men took us to Sallee in Moroc－co. They wanted to sell us as slaves in the markets there. But in the end the Turkish captain decided to keep me for himself，and took me home with him. This was a sudden and terrible change in my life. I was now a slave and this Turkish captain was my master.






■ 2 Down the coast of Africa
　　For two long years I lived the life of a slave. I worked in escape，but it was never possible. I thought about it day and night. My master liked to go fishing in a little boat，and he al-ways took me with him. A man called Moely，and a young boy also went with us.
　　One day my master said to us，'Some of my friends want to go fishing tomorrow. Get the boat ready. '
　　So we put a lot of food and drink on the boat，and the next morning，we waited for my master and his friends. But when my master arrived，he was alone.
　　'My friends don't want to go fishing today，'he said to me. 'But you go with Moely and the boy，and catch some fish for our supper tonight. '
　　'Yes，master，'I answered quietly，but inside I was excited. 'Perhaps now I can escape，'I said to myself.
　　My master went back to his friends and we took the boat out to sea. For a time we fished quietly，and then I moved carefully behind Moely and knocked him into the water. 'Swim！'I cried. 'Swim to the shore！'
　　My master liked to shoot seabirds and so there were guns on the boat. Quickly，I took one of these guns. Moely was swim－ming after the boat and I shouted to him：
　　Go back to the shore！You can swim there—it's not too far. I won't hurt you，but if you come near the boat，I'll shoot you through the head！'So Moely turned，and swam back to the shore as quickly as he could.
　　Then I said to the boy，'Xury，if you help me，I'll be a good friend to you. If you don't help me，I'll push you into the sea too. '
　　But Xury was happy to help me. 'I'll go all over the world with you，'he cried.
　　I wanted to sail to the Canary Islands，but I was afraid to go too far from the shore. It was only a small boat. And so we sailed on south for some days. We had very little water，and it was dangerous country here，with many wild animals. We were afraid，but we often had to go on shore to get more water. Once I used a gun to shoot a wild animal. I don't know what animal it was，but it made a good meal.
　　For about ten or twelve days we sailed on south，down the coast of Africa. Then one day we saw some people on the shore—strange，wild people，who did not look friendly. By now we had very little food，and We really needed help. we were afraid，but we had to go on shore.
　　At first，they were afraid of us，too. Perhaps white people never visited this coast. We did not speak their language，of course，so we used our hands and faces to show that we were hungry. They came with food for us，but then they moved away quickly. We carried the food to our boat，and they watched us. I tried to thank them，but I had nothing to give them.
　　Just then two big wild cats came down to the shore from the mountains. I think they were leopards. The people were afraid of these wild cats，and the women cried out. Quickly，I took a gun，and shot one of the animals. The second wild cat ran back up into the mountains.
　　Guns were new to these African people，and they were afraid of the loud noise and the smoke. But they were happy about the dead wild cat. I gave them the meat of the dead animal，and they gave us more food and water.
　　We now had a lot of food and water，and we sailed on. Eleven days later we came near the Cape Verde Islands. We could see them，but we couldn't get near because there was no wind. We waited.
　　Suddenly Xury called to me，'Look，a ship！'
　　He was right！We called and shouted and sailed our little boat as fast as we could. But the ship did not see us. Then I re-membered the guns which made a lot of smoke. A few minutes later the ship saw us and turned.
　　When we were on the ship，the Portuguese captain listened to my story. He was going to Brazil and agreed to help me，but he wanted nothing for his help. 'No，'he said，when I tried to pay him. 'Perhaps，one day，someone will help me when I need it. '
　　But he gave me money for my boat，and for Xury，too. At first，I did not want to sell Xury as a slave，after all our danger-ous adventures together. But Xury was happy to go to the cap-tain，and the captain was a good man. 'In ten years'time，'he said，'Xury can go free. '
　　When we arrived in Brazil three weeks later，I said goodbye to the captain and Xury，left the ship，and went to begin a new life.






■ 3 The storm and the shipwreck
　　I stayed in Brazil and worked hard for some years. By then I was rich…but also bored. One day some friends came to me and said，'We're going to Africa to do business. Why don't you come with us？We'll all be rich after this journey！'
　　How stupid I was！I had an easy，comfortable life in Brazil，but，of course，I agreed. And so，in 1659，I went to sea again.
　　At first，all went well，but then there was a terrible storm. For twelve days the wind and the rain didn't stop. We lost three men in the sea，and soon the ship had holes in its sides. 'We're all going to die this time，'I said to myself. Then one morning one of the sailors saw land，but the next minute our ship hit some sand just under the sea. The ship could not move and we were really in danger now. The sea was trying to break the ship into pieces，and we had very little time. Quickly，we put a boat into the sea and got off the ship. But the sea was very rough and our little boat could not live for long in that wild water.
　　Half an hour later the angry sea turned our boat over and we were all in the water. I looked round for my friends，but I could see nobody. I was alone.
　　That day I was lucky，and the sea carried me to the shore. I could not see the land，only mountains of water all around me. Then，suddenly，I felt the ground under my feet. Another mountain of water came，pushed me up the beach，and I fell on the wet sand.
　　At first I was very thankful to be alive. Slowly，I got to my feet and went higher up the shore. From there，I looked out to sea. I could see our ship，but it was wrecked and there was no－body near it. There was nobody in the water. All my friends were dead. I was alive，but in a strange wild country，with no food，no water，and no gun.
　　It was dark now and I was tired. I was afraid to sleep on the shore. Perhaps there were wild animals there. So I went up into a tree and I stayed there all night.






■ 4 A new life on an island
　　When day came，the sea was quiet again. I looked for our ship and，to my surprise，it was still there and still in one piece. 'I think I can swim to it，'I said to myself. So I walked down to the sea and before long，I was at the ship and was swimming round it. But how could I get on to it？In the end，I got in through a hole in the side，but it wasn't easy.
　　There was a lot of water in the ship，but the sand under the sea was still holding the ship in one place. The back of the ship was high out of the water，and I was very tnankful for this be-cause all the ship's food was there. I was very hungry so I be-gan to eat something at once. Then I decided to take some of it back to the shore with me. But how could I get it there？
　　I looked around the ship，and after a few minutes，I found some long pieces of wood. I tied them together with rope. Then I got the things that I wanted from the ship. There was a big box of food—rice，and salted meat，and hard ship's bread. I al-so took many strong knives and other tools，the ship's sails and ropes，paper，pens，books，and seven guns. Now I needed a little sail from the ship，and then I was ready. Slowly and carefully，I went back to the shore. It was difficult to stop my things from falling into the sea，but in the end I got everything on to the shore.
　　Now I needed somewhere to keep my things.
　　There were some hills around me，so I decided to build my－self a little house on one of them. I walked to the top of the highest hill and looked down，I was very unhappy，because I saw then that I was on an island. There were two smaller is-lands a few miles away，and after that，only the sea. Just the sea，for mile after mile after mile.
　　After a time，I found a little cave in the side of a hill. In front of it，there was a good place to make a home. So，I used the ship's sails，rope，and pieces of wood，and after a lot of hard work I had a very fine tent. The cave at the back of my tent was a good place to keep my food，and so I called it my 'kitchen'. That night，I went to sleep in my new home.
　　The next day I thought about the possible dangers on the is-land. Were there wild animals，and perhaps wild people too，on my island？I didn't know，but I was very afraid. So I decided to build a very strong fence. I cut down young trees and put them in the ground，in a halfcircle around the front of my tent. I used many of the ship's ropes too，and in the end my fence was as strong as a stone wall. Nobody could get over it，through it，or round it.
　　Making tents and building fences is hard work. I needed many tools to help me. So I decided to go back to the ship again，and get some more things.
　　I went back twelve times，but soon after my twelfth visit there was another terrible storm. The next morning，when I looked out to sea，there was no ship.
　　When I saw that，I was very unhappy. 'Why am I alive，and why are all my friends dead？'I asked myself. 'What will hap-pen to me now，alone on this island without friends？How can I ever escape from it？'
　　Then I told myself that I was lucky—lucky to be alive，lucky to have food and tools，lucky to be young and strong. But I knew that my island was somewhere off the coast of South America. Ships did not often come down this coast，and I said to myself，'I'm going to be on this island for a long time. 'So，on a long piece of wood，I cut these words：
　　I CAME HERE ON 30TH SEPTEMBER 1659
　　After that，I decided to make a cut for each day.






■ 5 Learning to live alone
　　I still needed a lot of things. 'Well，'I said，'I'm going to have to make them. 'So，every day，I worked.
　　First of all，I wanted to make my cave bigger. I carried out stone from the cave，and after many days' hard work I had a large cave in the side of the hill. Then I needed a table and a chair，and that was my next job. I had to work on them for a long time. I also wanted to make places to put all my food，and all my tools and guns. But every time I wanted a piece of wood，I had to cut down a tree. It was long，slow，difficult work，and during the next months I learnt to be very clever with my tools. There was no hurry. I had all the time in the world.
　　I also went out every day，and I always had my gun with me. Sometimes I killed a wild animal，and then I had meat to eat.
　　But when it got dark，I had to go to bed because I had no light. I couldn't read or write because I couldn't see. For a long time，I didn't know what to do. But in the end，I learnt how to use the fat of dead animals to make a light.
　　The weather on my island was usually very hot，and there were often storms and heavy rain. The next June，it rained all the time，and I couldn't go out very often. I was also ill for some weeks，but slowly，I got better. When I was stronger，I began to go out again. The first time I killed a wild animal，and the second time I caught a big turtle.
　　I was on the island for ten months before I visited other parts of it. During those months I worked hard on my cave and my house and my fence. Now I was ready to find out more about the rest of the island.
　　First，I walked along the side of a little river. There，I found open ground without trees. Later，I came to more trees with many different fruits. I decided to take a lot of the fruit，and to put it to dry in the sun for a time. Then I could keep it for many months.
　　That night I went to sleep in a tree for the second time，and the next day I went on with my journey. Soon I came to an opening in the hills. In front of me，everything was green，and there were flowers everywhere. There were also a lot of differ-ent birds and animals. I saw that my house was on the worst side of the island. But I didn't want to move from there. It was my home now. I stayed away for three days，and then I came home. But I often went back to the other，greener side of the island.
　　And so my life went on. Every month I learnt to do or to make something new. But I had troubles and accidents too. Once there was a terrible storm with very heavy rain. The roof of my cave fell in，and nearly killed me！I had to build it up again with many pieces of wood.
　　I had a lot of food now. I cooked it over a fire or dried it in the sun. So I always had meat during the rainy months when I could not go out with a gun. I learnt to make pots to keep my food in. But I wanted very much to make a harder，stronger pot—a pot that would not break in a fire. I tried many times，but I could not do it. Then one day I was lucky. I made some new pots and put them in a very hot fire. They changed colour，but did not break. I left them there for many hours，and when they were cold again，I found that they were hard and strong. That night I was very happy. I had hot water for the first time on the island.
　　By then，I also had my own bread. That was luck，too. One day I found a little bag. We used it on the ship，to keep the chickens' food in. There was still some of the food in the bag，and I dropped some of it onto the ground. A month later I saw something bright green there，and after six months I had a very small field of corn. I was very excited. Perhaps now I could make my own bread！
　　It was easy to say，but not so easy to do. It is a lot of work to make bread from corn. Many people eat bread，but how many people can take corn from a field and make bread out of it without help？I had to learn and to make many new things，and it was a year before I cooked and ate my first bread.
　　During all this time I never stopped thinking about escape. When I travelled across to the other side of the island，I could see the other islands，and I said to myself，'Perhaps I can get there with a boat. Perhaps I can get back to England one day. '
　　So I decided to make myself a boat. I cut down a big tree，and then began to make a long hole in it. It was hard work，but about six months later，I had a very fine canoe. Next，I had to get it down to the sea. How stupid I was！Why didn't I think before I began work？Of course，the canoe was too heavy. I couldn't move it！I pulled and pushed and tried everything，but it didn't move. I was very unhappy for a long time after that.
　　That happened in my fourth year on the island. In my sixth year I did make myself a smaller canoe，but I did not try to es-cape in it. The boat was too small for a long journey，and I did not want to die at sea. The island was my home now，not my prison，and I was just happy to be alive. A year or two later，I made myself a second canoe on the other side of the island. I also built myself a second house there，and so I had two homes.
　　My life was still busy from morning to night. There were al-ways things to do or to make. I learnt to make new clothes for myself from the skins of dead animals. They looked very strange，it is true，but they kept me dry in the rain.
　　I kept food and tools at both my houses，and also wild goats. There were many goats on the island，and I made fields with high fences to keep them in. They learnt to take food from me，and soon I had goat's milk to drink every day. I also worked hard in my cornfields. And so many years went by.






■ 6 A footprint
　　Then，one year，something strange and terrible happened. I often walked along the shore，and one day I saw something in the sand. I went over to look at it more care－fully，and stopped in sudden surprise.
　　It was a footprint—the footprint of a man！
　　Who could this be？Afraid，I looked around me. I listened. I waited. Nothing. I was more and more afraid. Perhaps this man was one of those wild people who killed and ate other men！I looked everywhere，but there was nobody，and no other foot-print. I turned and hurried home. 'There's someone on my is－land，'I said to myself. 'Perhaps he knows about me…Per-haps he's watching me now from behind a tree…Perhaps he wants to kill me. '
　　That night I couldn't sleep. The next day I got all my guns ready and I put more wood and young trees around my house. Nobody could see me now. But，after fifteen years alone on the island，I was afraid，and I did not leave my cave for three days.
　　In the end，I had to go out to milk my goats. But for two years I was afraid. I stayed near my home and I never used my guns because I didn't want to make a noise. I could not forget the footprint，but I saw and heard nothing more，and slowly I began to feel happier.
　　One day，a year later，I was over on the west side of the is-land. From there I could see the other islands，and I could also see a boat，far out to sea. 'If you have a boat，'I thought，'it's easy to sail across to this island. Perhaps that explains the foot-print—it was a visitor from one of the other islands. '
　　I began to move more freely around the island again，and built myself a third house. It was a very secret place in a cave. 'No wild man will ever find that，'I said to myself.
　　Then one year something happened which I can never forget. I was again on the west side of the island and was walk-ing along the shore. Suddenly，I saw something which made me feel ill. There were heads，arms，feet，and other pieces of men's bodies everywhere. For a minute，I couldn't think，and then I understood. Sometimes there were fights between the wild men on the other islands. Then they came here to my island with their prisoners，to kill them，cook them，and eat them. Slowly，I went home，but I was very angry. How could men do this？
　　For many months I watched carefully for the smoke from fires，but I didn't see anything. Somehow the wild men came and went，and I never saw them. I was angry and afraid. I wanted to shoot them all，but there were many of them and on-ly one of me. 'Perhaps I can shoot two or three，'I said to my－self，'but then they will kill and eat me. '
　　Then，one morning in my twenty-third year on the island，I was out in my fields and I saw the smoke from a fire. Quickly，I went up the hill to watch.
　　There were nine men around the fire，and they were cooking their terrible food. Then these wild men danced round the fire，singing and shouting. This went on for about two hours，and then they got into their boats and sailed away. I went down to the shore and saw the blood of the dead men on the sand. 'The next time they come，I'm going to kill them，'I said angrily.






■ 7 Friday
　　For two years I never went anywhere without my gun. I felt lonely and afraid，and had many sleepless nights. One night there was a very bad storm，and I thought I heard the sound of guns out at sea. The next morning I looked out，and saw a ship. It was lying on its side not far from the shore. Quickly，I put my little boat in the water and sailed out to it.
　　There were two dead men on the ship，but no one alive. The bodies of the other sailors were lost in the sea. I took some clothes and tools，and also a box of Spanish gold and silver money. I was a rich man now，but what use was money to me？I could not buy anything with it.
　　I wanted people，a friend，somebody to talk to…somebody who could help me escape from my island. One morning I woke up and made a plan. 'I'll try to catch one of the prisoners of the wild men，'I said to myself. 'He'll be happy to be alive and perhaps he'll help me to escape. 'I watched day and night，but for a year and a half there were no boats.
　　Then one day five boats came. There were about thirty men and they had two prisoners. They made their fire on the sand and danced round it. Then they killed one of the prisoners and began to cook their terrible meal. The second prisoner waited under the trees，with two men to watch him. Suddenly，the prisoner turned and ran. The two men ran after him，but the other wild men were busy round the fire and did not see what was happening.
　　The prisoner ran like a wild goat，and soon I saw that he was coming near the bottom of my hill. As fast as I could，I ran down the hill and jumped out of the trees between the prisoner and the two wild men. I hit the first man with the wooden end of my gun and he fell down，but I had to shoot the second man. The poor prisoner did not move. He was afraid of the noise of my gun.
　　I called to him and tried to show him that I was friendly. Slowly，he moved nearer to me，but just then the first wild man began to get up from the ground. Then the prisoner spoke and I understood that he wanted my sword. How happy I was to hear words again！I gave him my sword，and at once he cut off the head of his enemy.
　　Hurriedly，we hid the dead bodies under some leaves，and then left quickly. I took my prisoner to my secret cave on the other side of the island and gave him food and drink. After that，he went to sleep.
　　He was a fine young man，about twenty-five years old，tall and well－built，with a kind face and a nice smile. He had a brown skin，black hair，bright eyes and strong white teeth. I decided to give him the name of'Man Friday'，because I first saw him on a Friday.
　　When he woke up in the morning，he ran out to me. I was milking my goats in the field，and he got down on the ground and put his head near my foot. I understood that he was thank－ing me，and I tried to show him that I was his friend.
　　I began to teach him to speak English，and soon he could say his name，'Master'，and'Yes'and'No'. How good it was to hear a man's voice again！
　　Later that day we went back to my first house. We went carefully along the beach，but there were no boats and no wild men. Just blood and bones all over the sand. I felt ill，but Fri-day wanted to eat the pieces of men's bodies which were still on the ground. I showed him that this was terrible for me，and he understood.
　　When we got to my house，I gave Man Friday some trousers，and I made him a coat and a hat. He liked his new clothes very much. Then I made him a little tent to sleep in，but for a few weeks I always took my gun to bed with me. Per－haps Friday was still a wild man and would try to kill me in the night. At first，Friday was very afraid of my gun. Some－times he talked to it，and asked it not to kill him.
　　Friday was a quick learner and his English got better day by day. He helped me with the goats and with the work in the cornfields，and soon we were good friends. I enjoyed teaching him and，most of all，having a friend to talk to. This was the happiest of all my years on the island.
　　Friday and I lived together happily for three years. I told him the story of my adventures and about life in England，and he told me about his country and his people. One day we were at the top of the highest hill on the island，and we were looking out to sea. It was a very clear day and we could see a long way. Suddenly，Friday began to jump up and down，very excited.
　　'What's the matter？'I said.
　　'Look，Master，look！'Friday cried. 'I can see my country. Look over there！'
　　I looked，and there to the north-west，between the sea and the sky，was a long thin piece of land. I learnt later that it was the island of Trinidad，and that my island was in the mouth of the River Orinoco on the north coast of South America.
　　I began to think again about escape. Perhaps Friday wanted to go home too. Perhaps together we could get to his country. But what then？Would Friday still be my friend，or would his people kill me and eat me？
　　I took Friday to the other side of the island and showed him my big canoe. It still lay under the trees. It was very old now，and there were holes in the wood.
　　'Could a boat like this sail to your country，Friday？'I asked him.
　　'Oh yes，'he answered. 'A boat like this can carry a lot of food and drink. '
　　'Then we'll make another canoe like it，and you can go home in it，'I said.
　　But Friday looked very unhappy. 'Why are you angry with me？'he asked. 'What have I done？Why do you want to send me home？'
　　'But I thought you wanted to go home，'I said.
　　'Yes. But you must come with me. Kill me if you want，but don't send me away from you！'
　　Then I saw that Friday was a true friend，and so I agreed to go with him. We began work on the canoe at once. Friday chose the tree himself—he understood wood better than I did—and we cut it down. We worked hard and in a month the boat was finished. Two weeks later it was in the sea，and we began to get ready for our long journey.






■ 8 Escape from the island
　　I was now in my twenty—seventh year on the island，and I did not want to be there for another year. We worked hard to get the corn in，and to make a lot of bread. We had dried fruit and salted meat，and big pots to keep water in. One evening Friday went out to look for a turtle for meat and eggs. But in less than an hour he was back，and he looked very afraid.
　　'Master！Master！'he cried. 'There's a great ship near the island，and men are coming to the shore in a boat！'
　　I jumped up and ran with him down to the shore. To my great surprise，I saw that it was an English ship！But why was it here？English ships never came this way. Perhaps they were pirates！'Don't let them see you，Friday！'I called. 'We'll hide in the trees and watch. '
　　There were eleven men in the boat，but three of them were prisoners. Their arms were tied with rope，but their legs were free and they could walk. The other sailors pushed the three prisoners up the beach，laughing and shouting and hitting them. Then some of them sat down on the sand and began to drink. Others walked away to look at the island，and two men stayed to watch the boat. The three prisoners walked slowly a-long the beach and sat down under a tree，not far from us. They looked very unhappy.
　　Very quietly，I came up behind them through the trees，and called out to them in English.
　　'Don't be afraid，'I said. 'I'm an Englishman. Perhaps I can help you. '
　　The three men turned and looked at me. They did not answer at once；they were too surprised. Perhaps they thought I was a wild man myself，in my strange home—made clothes of animals' skins，and with my long hair and beard. Then the old－east man spoke.
　　'I am the captain of that ship，'he said，'and these two men are my first and second officers. Last night there was a mutiny，and the seamen took the ship from me. Now they're going to leave the three of us here，to die on this island. '
　　'De these mutineers have guns？'
　　'Only two，'he answered，'and they've left those on the boat. '
　　'All righ，'I said. 'We'll fight them，but if we get your ship back for you，you must take me back to England. '
　　The captain agreed immediately and thanked me very warm－ly for my help. Friday ran back to my house to get all the guns，and the captain and I made a plan.
　　The first part was easy because the seamen were not ready for a fight. We shot the two men at the boat，and the captain shot another man. This man，Tom Smith，was the worst of them all and he began the mutiny on the ship. Then the cap-tain talked to the other five men，and they agreed to help him. They did not really want to be mutineers，but they were afraid of Tom Smith.
　　'Now，'I said to the captain，'we must get back your ship. How many men are on it？'
　　'Twenty－six，'the captain replied，'and they will fight hard because they won't want to go home. It is death for all muti-neers in England. But not all the men are bad. I'm sure that some of them will help me. '
　　Just then we saw another boat，which was coming from the ship to the shore. There were ten men in it，and they all had guns. We ran into the trees and waited.
　　It was a long hard fight，but by now it was dark and this helped us very much. We ran here and there in the trees，call-ing and shouting. The seamen could not see us and did not know how many men they were fighting. In the end the first officer shouted to them：
　　'Put down your guns and stop fightng！The captain has fifty island people to help him. We can kill you all！'
　　So the seamen stopped fighting and we took their guns. Three of the men agreed to come back to the captain，and we put the others in my cave. Friday and I stayed to watch the prisoners，while the captain and his men went back to fight for the ship.
　　All night we listened to the sound of guns and shouting，but in the morning，when the sun came up，the captain was master of his ship again. I went down to the shore to meet him.
　　'My dear friend，'he cried，'There's your ship！I'll take you to the ends of the world in it！'
　　I put my arms round him，and we laughed and cried together. How happy I was to leave the ialand！
　　My good friend Friday came with me，of course，but we left the mutineers on the island. We decided not to kill them；they could begin a new life on the island. I showed them my three houses，my cornfields and my goats，and all my tools. Their life would he easy because of all my hard work for so many years.
　　And so，on the nineteenth of December 1689-after twen-ty-seven years，two months and nineteen days-I said good-bye to my island and sailed home to England.






■ 9 Home in England
　　When I came back to England，I felt like a stranger in the country. Many things were different，and not many people remembered me. I went home to York，but my fa-ther and mother were dead，and also my two brothers. I did find the two sons of one of my brothers. They were happy to learn that I was alive，and I was pleased to find some family.
　　After some months I decided to go down to Lisbon in Portu-gal. I had friends there who could help me to sell my land in Brazil，and I needed the money. Friday came with me. He was always a good and true friend to me. In Lisbon I found the Portuguese captain，who took me in his ship to Brazil，all those years ago. It was good to see him again，and he helped me with my business. Soon I was ready to go home again—by land. No more adventures and dangers by sea for me！
　　It was a long，hard journey. We had to cross the mountains between Spain and France in winter，and the snow was deep. Poor Friday was very afraid of the snow. In his country it was always hot，and he did not like cold weather.
　　Back in England I found a house and began to live a quiet life. My two nephews came to live with me. The younger one wanted to be a sailor，and so I found him a place on a ship. Af-ter a while I married，and had three children，two sons and a daughter. Then my wife died，and my nephew，who was now the captain of a ship，came home to see me. He knew that I did not really like a quiet life.
　　'I have a fine ship，uncle，'he said. 'I'm going out to the East Indies-India，Malaya，the Philippines…Why don't you come with me？'
　　And so，in 1694，I went to sea again，and had many more ad-ventures. Perhaps one day I'll write another book about them.




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Alice's Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll





■ 1 Down the rabbit-hole
　　Alice was beginning to get very bored．She and her sister were sitting under the trees．Her sister was reading，but Alice had nothing to do．Once or twice she looked into her sister's book，but it had no pictures or conversations in it．
　　'And what is the use of a book，'thought Alice，'without pictures or conversations？'
　　She tried to think of something to do，but it was a hot day and she felt very sleepy and stupid．She was still sitting and thinking when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran past her．
　　There was nothing really strange about seeing a rabbit．And Alice was not very surprised when the Rabbit said，'Oh dear！Oh dear！I shall be late！'(Perhaps it was a little strange， Alice thought later，but at the time she was not surprised．)
　　But then the Rabbit took a watch out of its pocket，looked at it，and hurried on．At once Alice jumped to her feet．
　　'I've never before seen a rabbit with either a pocket，or a watch to take out of it，'she thought．And she ran quickly across the field after the Rabbit．She did not stop to think， and when the Rabbit ran down a large rabbit-hole，Alice followed it immediately．
　　After a little way the rabbit-hole suddenly went down，deep into the ground．Alice could not stop herself falling，and down she went，too．
　　It was a very strange hole Alice was falling very slowly， and she had time to think and to look around her．She could see nothing below her because it was so dark．But when she looked at the sides of the hole，she could see cupboards and books and pictures on the walls．She had time to take things out of a cupboard，look at them，and then put them back in a cupboard lower down．
　　'Well！'thought Alice．'After a fall like this，I can fall anywhere！I can fall downstairs at home，and I won't cry or say a word about it！'
　　Down，down，down．'How far have I fallen now？'Alice said aloud to herself．'Perhaps I'm near the centre of the earth．Let me think…That's four thousand miles down．' (Alice was very good at her school lessons and could remember a lot of things like this．)
　　Down，down，down．Would she ever stop falling？Alice was very nearly asleep when，suddenly，she was sitting on the ground．Quickly，she jumped to her feet and looked around．She could see the White Rabbit，who was hurrying away and still talking to himself．'Oh my ears and whiskers！'he was saying．'How late it's getting！'
　　Alice ran after him like the wind．She was getting very near him when he suddenly turned a corner．Alice ran round the corner too，and then stopped．She was now in a long，dark room with doors all round the walls，and she could not see the White Rabbit anywhere．
　　She tried to open the doors，but they were all locked．'How will I ever get out again？'she thought sadly．Then she saw a little glass table with three legs，and on the top of it was a very small gold key．Alice quickly took the key and tried it in all the doors，but oh dear！Either the locks were too big，or the key was too small，but she could not open any of the doors．
　　Then she saw another door，a door that was only forty centimetres high．The little gold key unlocked this door easily， but of course Alice could not get through it—she was much too big．So she lay on the floor and looked through the open door，into a beautiful garden with green trees and bright flowers．
　　Poor Alice was very unhappy．'What a wonderful garden！' she said to herself．'I'd like to be out there—not in this dark room．Why can't I get smaller？'It was already a very strange day，and Alice was beginning to think that anything was possible．
　　After a while she locked the door again，got up and went back to the glass table．She put the key down and then she saw a little bottle on the table（'I'm sure it wasn't here before，'said Alice）．Round the neck of the bottle was a piece of paper with the words DRINK ME in large letters．
　　But Alice was a careful girl．'It can be dangerous to drink out of strange bottles，'she said．'What will it do to me？'She drank a little bit very slowly．The taste was very nice，like chocolate and oranges and hot sweet coffee，and very soon Alice finished the bottle．
　　* * *
　　'What a strange feeling！'said Alice．'I think I'm getting smaller and smaller every second．'
　　And she was．A few minutes later she was only twenty-five centimetres high．'And now，'she said happily，'I can get through the little door into that beautiful garden．'
　　She ran at once to the door．When she got there，she remembered that the little gold key was back on the glass table．She ran back to the table for it，but of course，she was now much too small！There was the key，high above her，on top of the table．She tried very hard to climb up the table leg，but she could not do it．
　　At last，tired and unhappy，Alice sat down on the floor and cried．But after a while she spoke to herself angrily．
　　'Come now，'she said．'Stop crying at once．What's the use of crying？'She was a strange child，and often talked to herself like this．
　　Soon she saw a little glass box near her on the floor．She opened it，and found a very small cake with the words EAT ME on it．
　　Nothing could surprise Alice now．'Well，I'll eat it，'she said．'If I get taller，I can take the key off the table．And if I get smaller，I can get under the door．One way or another，I'll get into the garden．So it doesn't matter what happens！'
　　She ate a bit of the cake，and then put her hand on top of her head．'Which way？Which way？'she asked herself，a little afraid．Nothing happened．This was not really surprising．People don't usually get taller or shorter when they eat cake．But a lot of strange things were happening to Alice today．'It will be very boring，'she said，'if nothing happens．'
　　So she went on eating，and very soon the cake was finished．



　　* * *



■ 2 The pool of tears
　　'Curiouser and curiouser！'said Alice．(She was very surprised，and for a minute she forgot how to speak good English．)
　　'I shall be as tall as a house in a minute，'she said．She tried to look down at her feet，and could only just see them．'Goodbye，feet！'she called．'Who will put on your shoes now？Oh dear！What nonsense I'm talking！'
　　Just then her head hit the ceiling of the room．She was now about three metres high．Quickly，she took the little gold key from the table and hurried to the garden door．
　　Poor Alice！She lay on the floor and looked into the garden with one eye．She could not even put her head through the door．
　　She began to cry again，and went on crying and crying．The tears ran down her face，and soon there was a large pool of water all around her on the floor．Suddenly she heard a voice， and she stopped crying to listen．
　　'Oh，the Duchess，the Duchess！She'll be so angry！I'm late，and she's waiting for me．Oh dear，oh dear！'
　　It was the white Rabbit again．He was hurrying down the long room，with some white gloves in one hand and a large fan in the other hand．
　　Alice was afraid，but she needed help．She spoke in a quiet voice．'Oh，please，sir—'
　　The Rabbit jumped wildly，dropped the gloves and the fan， and hurried away as fast as he could．
　　Alice picked up the fan and the gloves．The room was very hot，so she began to fan herself while she talked．'Oh dear！ How strange everything is today！Did I change in the night？ Am I a different person today？But if I'm a different person， then the next question is—who am I？Ah，that's the mystery．'
　　She began to feel very unhappy again，but then she looked down at her hand．She was wearing one of the Rabbit's white gloves．'How did I get it on my hand？'she thought．'Oh，I'm getting smaller again！'She looked round the room．'I'm al- ready less than a metre high．And getting smaller every second！How can I stop it？'She saw the fan in her other hand， and quickly dropped it．
　　She was now very，very small－and the little garden door was locked again，and the little gold key was lying on the glass table．
　　'Things are worse than ever，'thought poor Alice．She turned away from the door，and fell into salt water，right up to her neck．At first she thought it was the sea，but then she saw it was the pool of tears．Her tears．Crying makes a lot of tears when you are three metres tall．
　　'Oh，why did I cry so much？'said Alice．She swam around and looked for a way out，but the pool was very big．Just then she saw an animal in the water near her．It looked like a large animal to Alice，but it was only a mouse．
　　'Shall I speak to it？'thought Alice．'Everything's very strange down here，so perhaps a mouse can talk．'
　　So she began：'Oh Mouse，do you know the way out of this pool？I am very tired of swimming，oh Mouse！'(Alice did not know if this was the right way to speak to a mouse．But she wanted to be polite．)
　　The mouse looked at her with its little eyes，but it said nothing．
　　'Perhaps it doesn't understand English，'thought Alice．'Perhaps it's a French mouse．'So she began again，and said in French：'Where is my cat？'（This was the first sentence in her French lesson-book．）
　　The mouse jumped half out of the water and looked at her angrily．
　　'Oh，I'm so sorry！'cried Alice quickly．'Of course，you don't like cats，do you？'
　　'Like cats？'cried the mouse in a high，angry voice．'Does any mouse like cats？'
　　'Well，perhaps not，'Alice began kindly．
　　But the mouse was now swimming quickly away，and soon Alice was alone again．At last she found her way out of the pool and sat down on the ground．She felt very lonely and unhappy．But after a while the White Rabbit came past again， looking for his white gloves and his fan．
　　'The Duchess！The Duchess！Oh my ears and whiskers！She'll cut my head off，I know she will！Oh，where did I drop my gloves？'Then he saw Alice．'Why，Mary Ann， what are you doing here？Run home at once，and bring me some gloves and a fan．Quick，now！'
　　Alice hurried away．'But where is his house？'she thought while she ran．Strangely，she was no longer in the long room with the little door，but outside in a wood．She ran and ran but could not see a house anywhere，so she sat down under a flower to rest．






■ 3 Conversation with a caterpillar
　　'Now，'Alice said to herself．'First，I must get a little bigger，and second，I must find my way into that beautiful garden．I think that will be the best plan．But oh dear！How shall I get bigger？Perhaps I must eat or drink something，but the question is，what？'
　　Alice looked all around her at the flowers and the trees，but she could not see anything to eat．Then she saw a large mush- room near her．It was as tall as she was．She walked across to look at it，and there，on top of the mushroom，was a large caterpillar，smoking a pipe．After a while，the Caterpillar took the pipe out of its mouth and said to Alice in a slow，sleepy voice，'Who are you？'
　　'I don't really know，sir，'said Alice．'I know who I was when I got up this morning，but I have changed so often since then．I think I am a different person now．'
　　'What do you mean by that？'said the Caterpillar．'Explain yourself！'
　　'I can't explain myself，sir，'said Alice，'because I'm not myself，you know．'
　　'I don't know，'said the Caterpillar．
　　'It's difficult to describe，'Alice replied politely．'One minute I'm very small，the next minute I'm as tall as a house，then I'm small again．Usually，I stay the same all day，and changing so often feels very strange to me．'
　　'You！'said the Caterpillar，in a very unfriendly voice．'Who are you？'
　　They were now back at the beginning of their conversation， which was not very helpful．Alice felt a little cross and decided to walk away．
　　'Come back！'the Caterpillar called after her．'I've something important to say．'
　　This sounded better，so Alice turned back．
　　'Never get angry，'said the Caterpillar．
　　'Is that all？'said Alice，trying not to be angry．
　　'No，'said the Caterpillar．For some minutes it smoked its pipe and did not speak，but at last it took the pipe out of its mouth，and said，'So you've changed，have you？How tall do you want to be？'
　　'I would like to be a little larger，sir，please，'said Alice．'Eight centimetres is really very small．'
　　For a while the Caterpillar smoked its pipe．Then it shook itself，got down off the mushroom，and moved slowly away into the grass．It did not look back at Alice，but said，'One side will make you taller，and the other side will make you shorter．'
　　'One side of what？'thought Alice to herself．
　　She did not say this aloud，but the Caterpillar said， mushroom．'Then it moved away into the wood．
　　Alice looked at the mushroom carefully，but it was round， and did not have sides．At last she broke off a piece in each hand from opposite sides of the mushroom．She ate some of the piece in her left hand，and waited to see what would happen．
　　A minute later her head was as high as the tallest tree in the wood，and she was looking at a sea of green leaves．Then a bird appeared and began to fly around her head，screaming， 'Egg thief！Egg thief！Go away！'
　　'I'm not an egg thief，'said Alice．
　　'Oh no？'said the bird angrily．'But you eat eggs，don't you？'
　　'Well，yes，I do，but I don't steal them，'explained Alice quickly．'We have them for breakfast，you know．'
　　'Then how do you get them，if you don't steal them？' screamed the bird．
　　This was a difficult question to answer，so Alice brought up her right hand through the leaves and ate a little from the other piece of mushroom．She began to get smaller at once and， very carefully，she ate first from one hand，then from the other，until she was about twenty-five centimetres high．
　　'That's better，'she said to herself．'And now I must find that garden．'She began to walk through the wood，and after a while she came to a little house．






■ 4 The Cheshire Cat
　　There was a boy outside the door，with a large letter in his hand．(He was dressed like a boy，but his face was very like a fish，Alice thought．)The Fish-Boy knocked at the door，and a second later a large plate came flying out of an open window．
　　'A letter for the Duchess，'the Fish-Boy shouted．He pushed the letter under the door and went away．
　　Alice went up to the door and knocked，but there was a lot of noise inside and nobody answered．So she opened the door and walked in．
　　She found herself in a kitchen，which was full of smoke．There was a very angry cook by the fire，and in the middle of the room sat the Duchess，holding a screaming baby．Every few minutes a plate crashed to the floor．There was also a large cat，which was sitting on a chair and grinning from ear to ear．
　　'Please，'Alice said politely to the Duchess，'why does your cat grin like that？'
　　'It's a Cheshire Cat，'said the Duchess．'That's why．'
　　'I didn't know that cats could grin，'said Alice．
　　'Well，you don't know much，'said the Duchess．Another plate crashed to the floor and Alice jumped．'Here！'the Duchess went on．'You can hold the baby for a bit，if you like．The Queen has invited me to play croquet，and I must go and get ready．'She pushed the baby into Alice's arms and hurried out of the room．
　　'Oh，the poor little thing！'said Alice，looking at the baby， which had a very strange face．She took it outside into the wood and walked around under the trees．Then the baby began to make strange noises，and Alice looked into its face again．Its eyes were really very small for a baby，and its nose now looked very like the nose of a pig．
　　'Don't make noises like that，my dear，'said Alice．'It's not polite．You're beginning to sound like a pig．'
　　But a few minutes later，there was no mistake．It was a pig．Alice put it carefully on the ground，and it ran quietly away on its four legs into the wood．
　　'I'm pleased about that，'Alice said to herself．'It will be a good-looking pig，but it would be terrible to be a child with a face like that．
　　She was thinking about pigs and children when she suddenly saw the Cheshire Cat in a tree．The Cat grinned at her，and she went nearer to it．
　　'Please，'she said，'can you tell me which way to go from here？'
　　'But where do you want to get to？'said the Cat．
　　'It doesn't really matter—'began Alice．
　　'Then it doesn't matter which way you go，'said the Cat．
　　'But I would like to get somewhere，'Alice explained．
　　'If you just go on walking，'said the Cat，'in the end you'll arrive somewhere．'
　　That was true，thought Alice，but not very helpful，so she tried another question．'What kind of people live near here？'
　　'To the left，'the Cat said，'lives a Hatter．And to the right，lives a March Hare．You can visit either of them．They're both mad．'
　　'But I don't want to visit mad people，'said Alice．
　　'We're all mad here，you know，'said the Cat．'I'm mad．You're mad．'
　　'How do you know that I'm mad？'said Alice．
　　'Of course you're mad，'said the Cat．'Only mad people come here．'
　　Alice was thinking about this，but the Cat went on，'Are you playing croquet with the Queen today？'
　　'I would like to very much，'said Alice，'but nobody has invited me yet．'
　　'You'll see me there，'said the Cat，and vanished．
　　Alice was not really surprised at this，because so many strange things were happening today．She was still looking at the tree when，suddenly，the Cat appeared again．
　　'I forgot to ask，'said the Cat．'What happened to the baby？'
　　'It turned into a pig，'Alice said．
　　'I'm not surprised，'said the Cat，and vanished again．
　　Alice began to walk on，and decided to visit the March Hare．'It's the month of May now，'she said to herself，'so perhaps the Hare won't be as mad as he was in March．'
　　Suddenly，there was the Cheshire Cat again，sitting in another tree．Alice jumped in surprise．
　　'Do you think，'she said politely，'that you could come and go more slowly？'
　　'All right，'said the Cat．And this time it vanished very slowly．First its tail went，then its body，then its head，and last，the grin．
　　'Well！I've often seen a cat without a grin，'thought Alice，'but never a grin without a cat！'
　　Soon she saw the house of the March Hare in front of her．It was a large house，so she ate a little piece of mushroom to get bigger，and walked on．






■ 5 A mad tea-party
　　There was a table under a tree outside the house，and the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea．A Dormouse was sitting between them，asleep．The three of them were all sitting together at one corner of the table，but the table was large and there were many other seats．Alice sat down in a big chair at one end．
　　'Have some coffee，'the March Hare said in a friendly voice．
　　Alice looked all round the table，but she could only see a teapot．'I don't see any coffee，'she said．
　　'There isn't any，'said the March Hare．
　　'Then why did you ask me to have some？'said Alice crossly．'It wasn't very polite of you．'
　　'It wasn't very polite of you to sit down．We haven't invited you to tea，'said the March Hare．
　　'But there are lots of seats，'said Alice．
　　'Your hair's too long，'said the Hatter，looking at Alice with interest．
　　'It's not polite to say things like that，'said Alice．
　　The Hatter looked surprised，but he said，'Why is a bird like a desk？'
　　Alice was pleased．She enjoyed playing wordgames，so she said，'That's an easy question．'
　　'Do you mean you know the answer？'said the March Hare．
　　'Yes，'said Alice．
　　'Then you must say what you mean，'the March Hare said．
　　'I do，'Alice said quickly．'Well，I mean what I say．And that's the same thing，you know．'
　　'No，it isn't！'said the Hatter．'Listen to this．I see what I eat means one thing，but I eat what I see means something very different．'
　　Alice did not know what to say to this．So she took some tea and some bread-and-butter while she thought about it．The Dormouse woke up for a minute and then went to sleep again．After a while the Hatter took out his watch，shook it，then looked at it sadly．
　　'Two days slow！I told you that butter wasn't good for watches！'he said angrily to the March Hare．
　　'It was the best butter，'said the March Hare sadly．
　　Alice was looking at the watch with interest．'It's a strange watch，'she said．'It shows the day of the week，but not the time．'
　　'But we know the time，'said the Hatter．'It's always six o'clock here．'
　　Alice suddenly understood．'Is that why there are all these cups and plates？'she said．'It's always tea-time here，and you go on moving round the table．Is that right？But what happens when you come to the beginning again？'
　　'Don't ask questions，'said the March Hare crossly．'You must tell us a story now．'
　　'But I don't know any stories，'said Alice．
　　Then the March Hare and the Hatter turned to the Dormouse．'Wake up，Dormouse！'they shouted loudly in its ears．'Tell us a story．'
　　'Yes，please do，'said Alice．
　　The Dormouse woke up and quickly began to tell a story， but a few minutes later it was asleep again．The March Hare poured a little hot tea on its nose，and the Hatter began to look for a clean plate．Alice decided to leave and walked away into the wood．She looked back once，and the March Hare and the Hatter were trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot．
　　'Well，I won't go there again，'said Alice．'What a stupid tea-party it was！'Just then she saw a door in one of the trees．'How curious！'she thought．'But everything is strange today．I think I'll go in．'
　　So she went in．And there she was，back in the long room with the little glass table．At once，she picked up the gold key from the table，unlocked the little door into the garden，and then began to eat a piece of mushroom．When she was down to about thirty centimetres high，she walked through the door， and then，at last，she was in the beautiful garden with its green trees and bright flowers．






■ 6 The Queen's game of croquet
　　Near the door there was a rose-tree and three gardeners， who were looking at the roses in a very worried way．
　　'What's the matter？'Alice said to them．
　　'You see，Miss，'said the first gardener，'these roses are white，but the Queen only likes red roses，and she—'
　　'The Queen！'said the second gardener suddenly，and at once，the three gardeners lay down flat on their faces．Alice turned round and saw a great crowd of people．
　　It was a pack of cards，walking through the garden．There were clubs(they were soldiers)，and diamonds，and ten little children(they were hearts)．Next came some Kings and Queens．Then Alice saw the White Rabbit，and behind him， the Knave of Hearts．And last of all，came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS．
　　When the crowd came near to Alice，they all stopped and looked at her，and the Queen said，'Who are you？'
　　'My name is Alice，Your Majesty，'said Alice very politely．But she thought to herself，'They're only a pack of cards．I don't need to be afraid of them！'
　　'And who are these？'said the Queen，looking at the three gardeners．Then she saw the white roses，and her face turned red and angry．'Off with their heads！'she shouted，and soldiers hurried up to take the gardeners away．The Queen turned to Alice．'Can you play croquet？'she shouted．
　　'Yes！'shouted Alice．
　　'Come on，then！'shouted the Queen．The crowd began to move on，and Alice went with them．
　　'It's—it's a very fine day，'said a worried voice in her ear．Alice saw that the White Rabbit was by her side．
　　'Very fine，'said Alice．'Where's the Duchess？'
　　'Shhh！'said the Rabbit in a hurried voice．'She's in prison，waiting for execution．'
　　'What for？'said Alice．
　　But just then the Queen shouted，'Get to your places！'， and the game began．
　　It was the strangest game of croquet in Alice's life！The balls were hedgehogs，and the mallets were flamingoes．And the hoops were made by soldiers，who turned over and stood on their hands and feet．Alice held her flamingo's body under her arm，but the flamingo turned its long neck first this way and then that way．At last，Alice was ready to hit the ball with the flamingo's head．But by then，the hedgehog was tired of waiting and was walking away across the croquet-ground And when both the flamingo and the hedgehog were ready，there was no hoop！The soldiers too were always getting up and walking away．It really was a very difficult game，Alice thought．
　　The players all played at the same time，and they were al- ways arguing and fighting for hedgehogs．Nobody could agree about anything．Very soon，the Queen was wildly angry，and went around shouting'Off with his head！'or'Off with her head！'about once a minute．
　　Alice began to feel worried．'The Queen is sure to argue with me soon，'she thought．'And what will happen to me then？They're cutting people's heads off all the time here．I'm surprised there is anyone left alive！'
　　Just then she saw something very strange．She watched carefully，and after a minute or two she saw that the thing was a grin．'It's the Cheshire Cat，'she said to herself．'Now I'll have somebody to talk to．'
　　'How are you getting on？'said the Cat，when its mouth appeared．
　　Alice waited．'I can't talk to something without ears，'she thought．Slowly the Cat's eyes，then its ears，and then the rest of its head appeared．But it stopped at the neck，and its body did not appear．
　　Alice began to tell the Cat all about the game．'It's very difficult to play，'she said．'Everybody argues all the time， and the hoops and the hedgehogs walk away．'
　　'How do you like the Queen？'said the Cat quietly．
　　'I don't，'said Alice．'She's very—'Just then she saw the Queen behind her，so she went on，'—clever．She's the best player here．'
　　The Queen smiled and walked past．
　　'Who are you talking to？'said the King．He came up behind Alice and looked at the Cat's head in surprise．
　　'It's a friend of mine—a Cheshire Cat，'said Alice．
　　'I'm not sure that I like it，'said the King．'But it can touch my hand if it likes．'
　　'I prefer not to，'said the Cat．
　　'Well！'said the King angrily．He called out to the Queen， 'My dear！There's a cat here，and I don't like it．'
　　The Queen did not look round．'Off with its head！'she shouted．'Call for the executioner！
　　Alice was a little worried for her friend，but when the executioner arrived，everybody began to argue．
　　'I can't cut off a head，'said the executioner，'if there isn't a body to cut it off from．'
　　'You can cut the head off，'said the King，'from anything that's got a head．'
　　'If somebody doesn't do something quickly，'said the Queen，'I'll cut everybody's head off．'
　　Nobody liked that plan very much，so they all turned to Alice．'And what do you say？'they cried．
　　'The Cat belongs to the Duchess，'said Alice carefully．'Perhaps you could ask her about it．'
　　'She's in prison，'the Queen said to the executioner．'Bring her here at once．'
　　But then the Cat's head slowly began to vanish，and when the executioner came back with the Duchess，there was nothing there．The King ran wildly up and down，looking for the Cat，and the Duchess put her arm round Alice．'I'm so pleased to see you again，my dear！'she said．
　　'Let's get on with the game，'the Queen said angrily，and Alice followed her back to the croquet-ground．
　　The game went on，but all the time the Queen was arguing， and shouting'Off with his head！'or'Off with her head！' Soon there were no hoops left，because the soldiers(who were the hoops)were too busy taking everybody to prison．And at the end there were only three players left—the King，the Queen，and Alice．
　　The Queen stopped shouting and said to Alice，'Have you seen the Mock Turtle yet？'
　　'No，'said Alice．'I'm not sure what a Mock Turtle is．'
　　'Then come with me，'said the Queen．
　　They found the Mock Turtle down by the sea．Next to him was a Gryphon，asleep in the sun．Then the Queen hurried away，saying，'I have to get on with some executions．'
　　The Gryphon woke up，and said sleepily to Alice，'It's just talk，you know．They never execute anybody．'
　　Alice was pleased to hear this．She felt a little afraid of the Gryphon and the Mock Turtle，because they were so large．But they were very friendly，and sang songs and told her many stories about their lives．The Mock Turtle was in the middle of a very sad song when they all heard a shout a long way away： 'It's beginning！'
　　'Come on！We must hurry！'cried the Gryphon．It took Alice by the hand and began to run．






■ 7 Who stole the tarts？
　　The King and Queen of Hearts were sitting on their thrones when Alice and the Gryphon arrived．There was a great crowd of birds and animals，and all the pack of cards．
　　Soldiers stood all around the Knave of Hearts，and near the King was the White Rabbit，with a trumpet in one hand．
　　In the middle of the room there was a table，with a large plate of tarts on it．'They look good，'thought Alice，who was feeling a little hungry．
　　Then the White Rabbit called out loudly，'Silence！The trial of the Knave of Hearts will now begin！'He took out a long piece of paper，and read：
　　The Queen of Hearts，she made some tarts，
　　All on a summer day．
　　The Knave of Hearts，he stole those tarts，
　　And took them all away．
　　'Very good，'said the King．'Call the first witness．'
　　Alice looked at the jury，who were now writing everything down．It was a very strange jury．Some of the jurymen were animals，and the others were birds．
　　Then the White Rabbit blew his trumpet three times，and called out，'First witness！'
　　The first witness was the Hatter．He came in with a teacup in one hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other hand．'I'm very sorry，Your Majesty，'he said．'I was in the middle of tea when the trial began．'
　　'Take off your hat，'the King said．
　　'It isn't mine，'said the Hatter．
　　'Stolen！Write that down，'the King said to the jury．
　　'I keep hats to sell，'explained the Hatter．'I don't have a hat myself．I'm a Hatter．'
　　'Give your evidence，'said the King，or we'll cut your head off．'
　　The Hatter's face turned white．'I'm a poor man，Your Majesty，'he began，in a shaking voice．
　　Just then Alice had a strange feeling．After a minute or two she understood what it was．
　　'Don't push like that，'said the Dormouse，who was sitting next to her．'I'm nearly falling off my seat．'
　　'I'm very sorry，'Alice said politely．'I'm getting bigger and taller，you see．'
　　'Well，you can't do that here，'said the Dormouse crossly， and he got up and moved to another seat．
　　The Hatter was still giving evidence，but nobody could understand a word of it．The King looked at the Queen，and the Queen looked at the executioner．
　　The unhappy Hatter saw this，and dropped his bread-and- butter．'I'm a poor man，Your Majesty，'he said again．
　　'You're a very poor，speaker，'said the King．He turned to the White Rabbit．'Call the next witness，'he said．
　　The next witness was the Duchess's cook，who spoke very angrily and said that she would not give any evidence．The King looked worried and told the White Rabbit to call another witness．Alice watched while the White Rabbit looked at the names on his piece of paper．Then，to her great surprise，he called out loudly，'Alice！'
　　'Here！'cried Alice，jumping to her feet．
　　'What do you know about these tarts？'said the King．
　　'Nothing，'said Alice．
　　The Queen was looking hard at Alice．Now she said，'All people a mile high must leave the room．'
　　'I'm not a mile high，'said Alice．'And I won't leave the room．I want to hear the evidence．'
　　'There is no more evidence，'said the King very quickly， 'and now the jury will—'
　　'Your Majesty！'said the White Rabbit，jumping up in a great hurry．'We've just found this letter．There's no name on it，but I think the Knave wrote it．'
　　'No，I didn't！'said the Knave loudly．
　　'Read it to us，'said the King．
　　'Where shall I begin，Your Majesty？'asked the Rabbit．
　　'Begin at the beginning，'said the King，'and go on until you get to the end，then stop．'
　　Everybody listened very carefully while the White Rabbit read these words．
　　They tell me you have been to her，
　　And talked of me to him．
　　She thought I was a gardener，
　　But said I could not swim．
　　He tells them that I have not gone，
　　(We know that this is true)．
　　If she decides to hurry on，
　　What will they do to you？
　　I gave her one，they gave him two，
　　You gave us three or more．
　　They all returned from him to you，
　　But they were mine before．
　　'That's a very important piece of evidence，'said the King．He looked very pleased．'Now the jury must—'
　　'If anybody in the jury can explain that letter，'said Alice （she was not afraid of anything now，because she was much bigger than everybody in the room），'I'll give him sixpence．It's all nonsense！It doesn't mean anything．'
　　The jury busily wrote this down．'She thinks it's all nonsense．'
　　'All nonsense，eh？'said the King．He read some of the words again．'But said I could not swim．You can't swim， can you？'he said to the Knave．
　　The Knave's face was sad．'Do I look like a swimmer？'he said．(And he didn't—because he was made of paper．)
　　The King smiled．'I understand everything now，'he said．'There are the tarts，and here is the Knave of Hearts．And now the jury must decide who the thief is．'
　　'No，no！'said the Queen．'Off with his head！The jury can say what it thinks later．'
　　'What nonsense！'said Alice loudly．'The jury must decide first．You can't—'
　　'Be quiet！'said the Queen，her face turning red．
　　'I won't！'said Alice．
　　'Off with her head！'screamed the Queen．Nobody moved．
　　'It doesn't matter what you say，'said Alice．'You're only a pack of cards！'
　　Then the pack of cards flew up into the sky and began to fall on Alice's face．She gave a little scream… and woke up．She was lying next to her sister under the trees，and some leaves were falling on her face．
　　'Wake up，Alice dear，'said her sister．'You've been asleep a long time．'
　　'Oh，I've had a very curious dream！'said Alice，and she told her sister all about the strange adventures in her wonderful dream．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Anne of Green Gables by LM Montgomery





■ 1 A surprise for the Cuthberts
　　Matthew Cuthbert lived with his sister Marilla on their farm on Prince Edward Island in Canada. Their farm- house, Green Gables, was just outside the little village of Avonlea. Matthew was nearly sixty and had a long brown beard. His sister was five years younger. They were both tall and thin, with dark hair. Everybody in Avonlea knew that the Cuthberts were quiet people who worked very hard on their farm.
　　One afternoon Matthew drove the horse and cart to the sta-tion. 'Has the five-thirty train arrived yet
 'he asked the sta-tion-master.
　　'Yes, 'the man replied. 'And there's a passenger who's waiting for you. A little girl. '
　　'A little girl
 'asked Matthew. 'But I've come for a boy! The children's home is sending us one of their orphan boys. We're going to adopt him, you see, and he's going to help me with the farm work. '
　　'well, perhaps the children's home didn't have any boys, so they sent you a girl, 'answered the stationmaster carelessly. 'Here she is. '
　　Matthew turned shyly to speak to the child. She was about eleven, with long red hair in two plaits. Her face was small, white and thin, with a lot of freckles, and she had large grey-green eyes. She was wearing an old brown hat and a dress which was too small for her.
　　'Are you Mr Cuthbert of Green Gables
 'she asked excitedly in a high, sweet voice. 'I'm very happy to come and live with you, and belong to you. I've never belonged to anyone, you see. The people at the children's home were very kind, but it's not very exciting to live in a place like that, is it
 '
　　Matthew felt sorry for the child. How could he tell her that it was all a mistake
 But he couldn't just leave her at the sta-tion. He decided to take her home with him. Marilla could ex-plain the mistake to her.
　　He was surprised that he enjoyed the journey home. He was a quiet, shy man, and he didn't like talking himself. But to-day, he only had to listen, because the little girl talked and talked and talked. She told him all about herself while they drove along.
　　'My parents died when I was a baby, you know, and for the last three years I've had to work for my food. I've lived with three different families and looked after their children. So I've always been poor, and I haven't got any nice dresses! But I just imagine that I'm wearing the most beautiful blue dress, and a big hat with flowers on, and blue shoes, and then I'm happy! Do you imagine things sometimes
 '
　　'Well, I… I…not often, 'said Matthew.
　　They were now driving past some very old apple trees next to the road. The trees were full of sweet-smelling, snowy- white flowers. The little girl looked at them.
　　'Aren't the trees beautiful
 'she said happily. 'But am I talking too much
 Please tell me. I can stop if necessary, you know. '
　　Matthew smiled at her. 'You go on talking, 'he answered. 'I like listening to you. '
　　When they arrived at Green Gables, Marilla came to the door to meet them. But when she saw the little girl, she cried in surprise, 'Matthew, who's that
 Where's the boy
 '
　　'The children's home has made a mistake, 'he said unhappily, 'and sent a girl, not a boy. '
　　The child was listening carefully. Suddenly she put her head in her hands and began to cry.
　　'You—you don't want me! 'she sobbed. 'Oh—oh! You don't want me because I'm not a boy! '
　　'Now, now, don't cry, 'said Marilla kindly.
　　'Don't you understand
 Oh! This is the worst thing that's happened to me in all my life! '
　　'Well, you can stay here, just for tonight, 'said Marilla. 'Now, what's your name
 '
　　The child stopped crying. 'Will you please call me Cordelia
 ' she asked.
　　'Call you Cordelia
 Is that your name
 '
　　'Well, no, it isn't, but it's a very beautiful name, isn't it
 I like to imagine my name is Cordelia, because my real name is Anne Shirley—and that's not a very interesting name, is it
 '
　　Marilla shook her head. 'The child has too much imagina-tion, 'she thought.
　　Later, when Anne was in bed, Marilla said to her brother, 'She must go back to the children's home tomorrow. '
　　'Marilla, don't you think…'began Matthew. 'she's a nice little thing, you know. '
　　'Matthew Cuthbert, are you telling me that you want to keep her
 'asked Marilla crossly.
　　Matthew looked uncomfortable. 'Well, she's clever, and interesting, and—'
　　'But we don't need a girl! '
　　'But perhaps she needs us, 'Matthew replied, surprisingly quickly for him. 'She's had a very unhappy life up to now, Marilla. She can help you in the house. I can get a boy from the village to help me on the farm. What do you think
 '
　　Marilla thought for a long time. 'All right, 'she said in the end, 'I agree. The poor child can stay. I'll look after her. '
　　Matthew smiled happily. 'Be as good and kind to her as you can, Marilla. I think she needs a lot of love. '






■ 2 At Green Gables
　　And so the next morning Marilla said, 'Well, Anne, Matthew and I have decided to keep you, only if you're a good girl, of course. Why, child, what's the matter
 '
　　'I'm crying, 'sobbed Anne, 'because I'm very happy! It's beautiful here! People say I'm very bad, but I'll try very hard to be good. Oh, thank you! Thank you! '
　　'Now stop crying, child, 'said Marilla a little crossly, 'and listen. We're going to adopt you, and send you to school after the summer holidays. '
　　Anne stopped crying. 'Can I call you Aunt Marilla
 I've never had any family at all, so I'd really like to have an aunt. We could imagine that you're my mother's sister. '
　　'I couldn't, 'answered Marilla firmly.
　　'Don't you imagine things
 'asked Anne, surprised.
　　'No, I don't, 'Marilla replied. 'I do my housework, and look after Matthew, and go to church on Sunday. There's no time for imagining things in this house. Just remember that, Anne. '
　　Anne was silent for a few minutes. Then she said, 'Marillam do you think I'll find a best friend in Avonlea
 Someone who really understands me and knows all my secrets. I've always wanted a friend like that. '
　　'Our friends, the Barrys, have a daughter called Diana, who's eleven, like you But if you want to play with her, you'll have to be very good. Mrs Barry is very careful about Diana's friends. '
　　'Diana! What a beautiful name! 'said Anne excitedly. 'Her hair isn't red, is it
 I hope it isn't. 'She looked sadly at her red plaits. 'I hate my hair. '
　　'Diana has dark hair. She's a good, clever girl. Try to be like her, Anne. '
　　When the two girls met, they knew at once that they would be good friends. They often played together, in the fields, or by the river, or in the garden. In the morning Anne helped Marilla with the housework. Then in the afternoon she played with Diana, or talked happily to Matthew while he worked on the farm. She soon knew and loved every flower, tree, and animal at Green Gables.
　　The Cuthberts had another friend, Mrs Rachel Lynde. She liked to know everything that was happening in and around Avonlea. She was very interested in the Cuthberts'little or-phan girl, so one day she visited Marilla.
　　'I was very surprised to hear about the child, 'she told Mar-illa. 'So you and Matthew have adopted her! '
　　'I'm surprised myself, 'answered Marilla with a smile. 'But she's a clever little thing, you know. And she's always dancing, or singing, or laughing. '
　　Mrs Lynde shook her head sadly. 'What a mistake, Marilla! You've never had any children yourself, so how can you look after her
 '
　　Just then Anne ran in from the garden. She stopped sudden-ly when she saw a stranger in the kitchen. Mrs Lynde looked at the thin little girl in the short dress, with her freckled face and red hair.
　　'Isn't she thin, Marilla
 'she said. 'Just look at those freckles! And hair as red as carrots! '
　　Anne's face went red. She ran up to Mrs Lynde.
　　'I hate you! 'she shouted angrily. 'I hate you! You're a horrible, fat old woman! 'And she ran upstairs.
　　'Oh dear, oh dear! 'said Mrs Lynde. 'What a terrible child! You'll not have an easy time with her, Marilla. '
　　'You were rude to her, Rachel, 'Marilla replied, before she could stop herself.
　　'Well! 'said Mrs Lynde. She got up and walked to the door. 'I think this orphan is more important to you than I am. When I think how long we've been friends…You'll have trouble with her, I can tell you. Well, I'm sorry for you, that's all. Goodbye. '
　　Marilla went upstairs to Anne's room. The child was lying on her narrow bed, sobbing loudly.
　　'You mustn't get angry like that, Anne. Mrs Lynde is my friend, and you were very rude to her. '
　　'She was rude to me! 'said Anne. 'She said I was thin and freckled and red-haired. It was very unkind! '
　　'I understand how you feel, 'said Marilla. 'But you must go to her and tell her you're sorry. '
　　'I can never do that, 'said Anne firmly.
　　'Then you must stay in your room and think about it. You can come out when you agree to say that you're sorry. '
　　Anne stayed in her room all the next day. Downstairs the house was very quiet without her. That evening, while Marilla was busy in the garden, Matthew went up to Anne's room. The child was sitting sadly by the window.
　　'Anne, 'he said shyly, 'why don't you say you're sorry
 Then you can come down, and we can all be happy. '
　　'I am sorry now, 'said Anne. 'I was very angry yesterday! But do you really want me to…'
　　'Yes, do, please. It's lonely downstairs without you. But don't tell Marilla I've talked to you. '
　　Marilla was pleased to hear that Anne was sorry. Later that evening, when she and Anne were in Mrs Lynde's warm kitchen, Anne suddenly fell on her knees.
　　'Oh Mrs Lynde, 'cried the little girl, 'I'm very sorry. I can't tell you how sorry I am, so you must just imagine it. I am a bad girl! But please say you will forgive me. I'll be sad all my life if you don't ! '
　　'She's enjoying herself! 'thought Marilla, watching Anne's face. 'She doesn't look sorry at all, but happy and excited! '
　　But Mrs Lynde said kindly, 'Of course I forgive you. 'And later she said to Marilla, 'Perhaps you're right to keep her. She's a strange little thing, but I think I like her. '






■ 3 At Avonlea school
　　When school started in September, Anne and Diana walked there and back together every day.
　　'What a beautiful day, 'Anne said happily one morning, as the two little girls walked across the fields. 'I'm very lucky to have you as my best friend, Diana. You are my best friend, aren't you
 '
　　'Of course, Anne, 'replied Diana, taking Anne's hand. 'And just think, today you'll meet Gilbert Blythe. He's three years older than us, and very good-looking. He's just come back from holiday, and starts school today. '
　　'Oh, boys! 'said Anne. 'I'm not interested in them. '
　　But she did look at Gilbert when they arrived at school. He was a tall boy, with curly brown hair and a friendly smile.
　　'He is good-looking, 'Anne whispered to Diana, 'but why does he smile at me
 He doesn't know me! '
　　Avonlea school was quiet that day. The teacher, Mr Phillips, was helping some of the older children at the back of the schoolroom. Anne was looking out of the window at the reds and yellows of the trees, and the silvery blue of the river. She was far away in the world of her imagination. But Gilbert wanted her to look at him. He whispered to her, but she did not move. He was surprised. Girls were usually very ready to look at him.
　　Suddenly he put his arm out, pulled her red plaits, and said in a loud whisper, 'Carrots! Carrots! '
　　Anne jumped up and looked angrily at Gilbert.
　　'You horrible boy! 'she cried. 'I hate you! 'And then she brought her heavy book down on Cilbert's head.
　　Mr Phillips heard the noise, and came slowly to the front of the schoolroom.
　　'Anne Shirley, why did you do that
 'he asked. She stayed silent. Gilbert said, 'I'm sorry, Mr Phillips. I was rude to her. That's why she hit me. 'But the teacher did not listen to Gilbert.
　　'I cannot have bad children in my school, 'said Mr Phillips firmly, 'Anne, go and stand in front of the class. 'And there Anne stood for the rest of the day, a lonely little girl with a small white angry face.
　　'I hate Mr Phillips! 'she thought. 'And I'll never look at or speak to Gilbert Blythe again! '
　　The next day some of the school children were playing in a farmer's field in their lunch hour, so they were a little late for afternoon school. Anne ran into the classroom at the same time as the boys, just after the teacher.
　　'You're late, Anne, 'said Mr Phillips. 'You won't sit with Diana today. I see that you enjoy being with the boys very much, so go and sit next to Gilbert this afternoon. '
　　Anne's face went white. 'He can't mean it! 'she thought.
　　'Did you hear me, Anne
 'asked Mr Phillips.
　　'Yes sir, 'said Anne and moved slowly to Gilbert's desk. There she sat down and put her head on the desk, with her arms over it.
　　'This is the end, 'she was thinking. 'I wasn't the only per-son who was late. And he's sent me to sit with a boy! And that boy is Gilbert Blythe! '
　　The rest of the day went very slowly for Anne. When it was time to leave, she went to her desk, next to Diana's, and took all her books, pens and pencils with her.
　　'What are you doing, Anne
 'asked Diana.
　　'I'm not coming back to school, 'replied Anne firmly.
　　'Oh! But Anne…we're reading a new book next week…and we're playing a new game on Monday, and… It'll be very exciting! And you'll miss it, Anne! '
　　But Anne was not interested. 'I'm sorry, Diana, 'was her only answer.
　　That evening Marilla ran round to Rachel Lynde's house. 'Rachel, please help me! Anne says she won't go back to school. What am I going to say to her
 '
　　Mrs Lynde already knew about Anne's troubles at school, and she was always very pleased when people asked her to help. She smiled and sat back comfortably.
　　'I've had ten children myself, so I know all about them, 'she said. 'Anne can stay at home for a while. She'll want to go back to school again soon, I'm sure. '
　　So Anne stayed at home, and only saw Diana in the evenings. She was a child who felt very strongly. She hated Gilbert Blythe, but she really loved Diana.
　　One evening Marilla found Anne crying in the kitchen. 'What's the matter, child
 'she asked in surprise.
　　'I love Diana very much, 'sobbed Anne. 'I can't live with-out her, Marilla! But what will happen when she marries
 I hate her husband already! I can imagine her in the church in her long white dress…and then she'll go away! And I'll nev-er see her again! '
　　Marilla turned away to hide her smiling face. What a strange, funny child Anne was! Marilla tried not to laugh, but she couldn't stop herself.
　　'You and your imagination, Anne Shirley! 'she cried, and she laughed and laughed.
　　Mrs Lynde was right, of course. After a few days Anne de-cided to go back to school. All the children were pleased to see her again, but she did not speak to Gilbert Blythe.






■ 4 More trouble for Anne
　　'I think I'll ask the new vicar, Mr Allan, and his wife to tea on Wednesday. 'said Marilla one day.
　　'Oh yes, please do! 'cried Anne excitedly. 'Mrs Allan is young and beautiful, and has a very sweet smile! Can I make a cake for tea
 Say yes, Marilla! '
　　Marilla agreed, and for the next few days Anne planned what she would put in her cake.
　　'I do hope it's going to be a good one, 'she told Diana. 'Sometimes I forget to put in the right things. '
　　'You made a very good one last week, 'said her friend. 'I'm sure it'll be all right. '
　　On Wednesday the tea party started very well.
　　'These are very good cakes, Miss Cuthbert, 'Mrs Allan said to Marilla. 'You have been busy. '
　　'Anne made this one, specially for you, Mrs Allan, 'replied Marilla.
　　'Oh well, I must try some, 'laughed the vicar's wife. But after the first mouthful there was a very strange look on her face.
　　'Is anything wrong
 'asked Marilla. She ate a piece of Anne's cake herself. 'Oh! Anne! What have you put in this cake
 'she cried.
　　'Isn't it…isn't it all right
 'asked Anne, her face red.
　　'All right
 It's horrible! Don't try to eat any more, Mrs Allan. Anne, you've put my medicine in this cake! '
　　'Oh! I didn't know! It was white, and in a bottle! I thought it was milk! 'sobbed Anne. She ran upstairs and fell on her bed, crying loudly.
　　But later that evening, when Mrand Mrs Allan went home, Marilla came to talk to her.
　　'Oh Marilla! 'cried Anne. 'Everybody in Avonlea will laugh at me for putting medicine in a cake! '
　　Marilla smiled and touched Anne's hot face. 'No, they won't, Anne. Mrs Allan wasn't angry, you know. She said it was very kind of you to make her a cake, and she's asked you to tea at her house! '
　　'Oh, so she's forgiven me! She is nice, isn't she
 'said Anne thankfully. 'Why do I get into trouble like this
 Perhaps I won't make any mistakes tomorrow. '
　　Marilla shook her head, still smiling. 'You'll think of some-thing, Anne. You're very good at making mistakes! '
　　***
　　Spring came, with its bright green leaves and early flowers. One April evening Marilla came home late after visiting friends. She found the kitchen empty, and no supper on the table.
　　'Where's Anne
 'she thought crossly. 'I told her to get the supper ready. 'She hurried upstairs to Anne's room, and found the girl sobbing on her bed.
　　'Don't look at me, Marilla! 'Anne cried. 'I know I'm bad, I know I am! '
　　'What is the matter
 'asked Marilla. 'Are you ill
 '
　　'Oh Marilla, I just want to die! Look at my hair! '
　　And Marilla saw that Anne's long thick red hair was now a horrible dark green.
　　'Oh Anne! 'she said, 'What have you done now
 '
　　'I…I bought a bottle of something special from a man who came to the door. He said it would change my hair from red to black! Oh, I know it was stupid of me! But what shall I do
 '
　　They washed Anne's hair again and again, but it was still green. Anne stayed at home for a week, saw nobody, and washed her hair every day. But at the end of the week, Maril-la said, 'I'm sorry, Anne, we'll have to cut it all off. You can't go to school with green hair. '
　　Anne had to agree. 'Perhaps this will teach me not to think about being beautiful, 'she said sadly.
　　Everybody was surprised to see Anne with very short hair, but no one learned the secret. And some weeks later, there were some new, darker red curls, which pleased Anne very much.
　　* * *
　　That summer Anne and her friends often played in an old boat on the river.
　　'Today, let's imagine that I'm a prisoner and I'm escaping from prison by boat, 'said Anne. 'I'll hide in the boat and the river will carry it down to the bridge. You're my family, and you must meet me at the bridge. '
　　The other girls agreed, so Anne got into the boat and hid under some coats. Her friends pushed the boat off down the river and ran across the fields to get round to the bridge. For a few minutes the prisoner enjoyed the game, but then she sud- denly felt wet and sat up. Water was coming in very fast through a hole in the bottom of the boat! Luckily, there were some trees by the river and Anne saw a low branch over the water. She jumped up and caught the branch. The boat went on without her and a few seconds later went down under the water.
　　Her friends on the bridge saw the boat, but they did not see Anne under the tree. 'Oh! Oh! Anne's dead! The boat's gone down and she's in the river! 'they screamed, and ran back to the village for help.
　　Poor Anne could not move. She held on and held on, but her arms were getting tired and she knew that she would fall in a minute. Suddenly, there was Gilbert Bly the in his boat!
　　'Anne Shirley! 'he cried. 'What are you doing there
 'He did not wait for an answer, but quickly helped Anne into his boat. She didn't say a word. When they arrived at the bridge, she got out and turned away.
　　'Thank you for helping me, 'she said coldly.
　　But Gilbert jumped out, and put a hand on her arm.
　　'Anne, 'he said quickly, 'I'm sorry I called you "carrots. "It was a long time ago. I think your hair is really nice now. Can we forget it, and be friends
 '
　　For a second Anne wanted to say yes. But then she remembered standing alone in front of the school children all after-noon, because of Gilbert. She would never forgive him for that! 'No, 'she replied coldly, 'I shall never be your friend, Gilbert Bly the! '
　　'All right! 'Gilbert jumped angrily back into his boat. 'I'll never ask you again, Anne Shirley! '
　　Anne walked home with her head held high, but she felt strangely sad, and wanted to cry.
　　'Why are you always in trouble, Anne
 'asked Marilla, when she heard about Anne's adventure.
　　'Well, I think I'm learning, Marilla, 'answered Anne. 'I learn from my mistakes, and after today, I won't use my imagination so much. I don't think Avonlea is the right place for imagination. '
　　'No, it isn't, 'agreed Marilla a little crossly.
　　When she went out, Matthew, who was sitting quietly in his corner, whispered to Anne, 'Keep a little imagination, Anne, not too much, of course, just a little. '



　　* * *
　　* * *



■ 5 Queen's College
　　One day Marilla said, 'Anne, your new teacher, Miss Stacy, spoke to me yesterday. She says you must study for the examinations for Queen's College in two years' time. Then if you do well, you can study at Queen's in Charlotte-town for a year, and after that you'll be a teacher! '
　　'Oh Marilla! I'd love to be a teacher! But won't it be very expensive
 '
　　'That doesn't matter, Anne. When Matthew and I adopted you three years ago, we decided to look after you as well as we could. Of course we'll pay for you to study. '
　　So in the afternoons Anne and some of her friends stayed late at school, and Miss Stacy helped them with the special ex-amination work. Diana didn't want to go to Queen's, so she went home early, but Gilbert stayed. He and Anne still never spoke and everybody knew that they were enemies, because they both wanted to be first in the examination. Secretly, Anne was sorry that she and Gilbert weren't friends, but it was too late now.
　　For two years Anne studied hard at school. She enjoyed learning, and Miss Stacy was pleased with her. But she didn't study all the time. In the evenings and at weekends she visited her friends, or walked through the fields with Diana, or sat talking to Matthew.
　　'Your Anne is a big girl now. She's taller than you, 'Rachel Lynde told Marilla one day.
　　'You're right, Rache! 'said Marilla in surprise.
　　'And she's a very good girl now, isn't she
 She doesn't get into trouble these days. I'm sure she helps you a lot with the housework, Marilla. '
　　'Yes, I don't know what I'd do without her, 'said Marilla, smiling.
　　'And look at her! Those beautiful grey eyes, and that red-brown hair! You know, Marilla, I thought you and Matthew made a mistake when you adopted her. But now I see I was wrong. You've looked after her very well. '
　　'Well, thank you, Rachel, 'replied Marilla, pleased.
　　That evening, when Matthew came into the kitchen, he saw that his sister was crying.
　　'What's the matter
 'he asked, surprised. 'You haven't cried since…well, I can't remember when. '
　　'It's just…well, I was thinking about Anne, 'said Marilla. 'I'll…I'll miss her when she goes away. '
　　'When she goes to Queen's, you mean
 Yes, but she can come home at weekends, on the train. '
　　'I'll still miss her, ' said Marilla sadly.
　　In June the Avonlea boys and girls had to go to Charlotte-town to take their examinations.
　　'Oh, I do hope that I've done well, 'Anne told Diana when she arrived back at Green Gables. 'The examinations were very difficult. And I've got to wait for three weeks before I know! Three weeks! I'll die! '
　　Anne wanted to do better than Gilbert. But she also wanted to do well for Matthew and Marilla. That was very important to her.
　　Diana was the first to hear the news. She ran into the kitchen at Green Gables and shouted, 'Look, Anne! It's in Father's newspaper! You're first… with Gilbert…out of all the students on the island! Oh, how wonderful! 'Anne took the paper with shaking hands, and saw her name, at the top of the list of two hundred. She could not speak.
　　'Well, now, I knew it, 'said Matthew with a warm smile.
　　'You've done well, I must say, Anne, 'said Marilla, who was secretly very pleased.
　　For the next three weeks Anne and Marilla were very busy. Anne needed new dresses to take to Charlottetown.
　　The evening before she left, she put on one of her new dresses to show Matthew. Marilla watched the happy young face. She remembered the strange, thin little child, with her sad eyes, who arrived at Green Gables five years ago, and she started crying quietly.
　　'Marilla, why are you crying
 'asked Anne.
　　'I was just thinking of you when you were a little girl, 'said Marilla. 'And…you're going away now…and I'll be lonely without you. '
　　Anne took Marilla's face in her hands, 'Marilla, nothing will change. Perhaps I'm bigger and older now, but I'll al-ways be your little Anne. And I'll love you and Matthew and Green Gables more every day of my life. '
　　Marilla could not say what she felt, like Anne, but she could show it. She put her arms round her girl and held her close to her heart.
　　And so for the next year Anne lived in Charlottetown, and went to college every day. She sometimes came home at week-ends, but she had to study hard. Some of her Avonlea friends were at Queen's too, and also her enemy, Gilbert Blythe. Anne saw that he often walked and talked with other girls. She felt sure that she and Gilbert could have some interesting conversations. But she didn't want to be the first to speak to him, and he never looked at her.
　　There were examinations at the end of the college year, in May. Anne studied very hard for them.
　　'I'd love to get the first place, 'she thought. 'Or perhaps I could get the Avery prize. 'This was a prize for the student who was best at English writing, and Anne knew she was good at that. The Avery prize paid for a free place for four years at Redmond College, one of the best colleges in Canada.
　　When news of the examinations came, Anne waited for her friends to tell her. She heard shouting. 'It's Gilbert! He's the first! ' She felt ill. But just then she heard another shout. 'Anne Shirley's got the Avery! 'And then all the girls were round her, laughing and shouting.
　　'Matthew and Marilla will be pleased! 'thought Anne. 'Now I can go on studying, and they won't have to pay! '






■ 6 Matthew and Marilla
　　But when she arrived back at Green Gables, Anne knew at once that something was wrong. Matthew looked
　　much older than before.
　　'What's the matter with him
 'Anne asked Marilla.
　　'He's had some heart trouble this year, 'replied Marilla. 'He really isn't well. I'm worried about him. '
　　'And you're not looking well, Marilla, 'said Anne. 'Now you must rest, while I do the housework. '
　　Marilla smiled tiredly at Anne. 'It's not the work, it's my head. It often hurts, behind my eyes. I must see the doctor about it soon. But another thing, Anne, have you heard any-thing about the Church Bank
 '
　　'I heard it was having a difficult time. '
　　'All our money is in that bank. I know Matthew's worried about it. '
　　The next morning a letter came for Matthew. Marilla saw his grey face and cried, 'What's the matter, Matthew
 '
　　Anne, who was bringing an armful of flowers into the kitchen, saw his face too. Suddenly, Matthew fell to the ground. Anne dropped her flowers and ran to help Marilla. Together they tried everything, but it was too late. Matthew was dead.
　　'It was his heart, 'said the doctor, who arrived a little later. 'Did he have any bad news suddenly
 '
　　'The letter! 'cried Anne. 'Shall I see what's in it
 Oh Mar-illa, look! The Church Bank has had to close down! Your money, and Matthew's, has all gone! '
　　Everybody in Avonlea was sorry to hear that Matthew was dead. For the first time in his life, Matthew Cuthbert was an important person.
　　At first Anne couldn't cry. But then she remembered Matthew's smiling face when she told him about the Avery prize. Suddenly she started crying and couldn't stop. Marilla held her in her arms and they sobbed together.
　　'Crying can't bring him back, 'whispered Marilla. 'We'll have to learn to live without him, Anne. '
　　* * *
　　In the next few weeks Anne and Marilla worked hard together on the farm and in the house. Everybody in Avonlea was very kind to them, but it was a sad time.
　　One day Marilla said, 'I'll miss you when you go to Red-mond College, Anne. What are the other Avonlea students go-ing to do
 '
　　'Some of them are going to teach, and some are going to stay at Queen's. '
　　'Gilbert's going to teach at Avonlea school, isn't he
 'Anne didn't reply, so Marilla went on. 'He's very tall and good-looking now, don't you think
 Like his father, John, when he was younger. You know, John and I were very good friends, years ago. '
　　Anne looked up, interested. 'What happened
 Why didn't you…
 '
　　'Well, we had a fight about something. He asked me to be friends again, but I couldn't forgive him. Later I was sorry, but he didn't speak to me again. Perhaps we…Oh well, it was a long time ago. '
　　The next day Marilla went to see the doctor. When she came back, she looked very tired and ill.
　　'What did the doctor say
 'asked Anne worriedly.
　　'He says I mustn't read or write, and I must wear glasses. Then my head won't hurt. But if I'm not very careful, I'll be blind in six months! '
　　For a minute Anne was silent. Then she said firmly, 'Then you must be careful, Marilla. '
　　'Think how terrible it is to be blind! But how lucky you've got a free place at Redmond College! I can't give you any money, you see. All our money's gone, and I can't work now. I think I'll have to sell the farm, and go and live with Rachel Lynde! 'and poor Marilla sobbed wildly.
　　That night Anne sat alone in her bedroom. She thought and thought for some time, and then she smiled. When she went to bed, she knew what she was going to do.
　　The next day she explained it all to Marilla.
　　'You can't sell Green Gables, it's our home! Just listen, I've planned everything. I'm not going to Redmond College, it's too far away. I'm going to teach, in one of the village schools near here. Then I can live there during the week and come home at weekends to look after you. Diana's father will use our fields and pay us for them, and so we'll have some money. You see
 '
　　'Oh Anne! I'll be all right if you're here. But you must go to Redmond, if you want to study…'
　　'Redmond College doesn't matter, 'laughed Anne. 'I'm going to study at home in the evenings. And I'm going to be a really good teacher! That's better than anything! '
　　Marilla shook her head and tried not to cry. 'You're a good girl, Anne. Now we can keep Green Gables! '
　　A few days later Rachel Lynde came to the farm.
　　'Do you know, 'she said, 'that Gilbert isn't going to be the Avonlea teacher now
 '
　　'Isn't he
 'cried Anne. 'Why not
 '
　　'When he heard that you wanted to be near Marilla, he de-cided to teach at a school in another village. So you can be the Avonlea teacher now. '
　　'Oh! 'said Anne, surprised. 'That's…that's very kind of him. '
　　And that day, when she saw Gilbert by the river, she stopped him and held out her hand.
　　'Gilbert, 'she said shyly, 'I… I want to thank you. It's very good of you. If I'm the Avonlea teacher, I can help Mar-illa much more at home. '
　　'I'm happy to help you, Anne, 'said Gilbert. He smiled and held her hand firmly. 'Are we going to be friends now
 Have you forgiven me for calling you"carrots"
 '
　　Anne laughed. 'I forgave you a long time ago. '
　　'I'm sure we're going to be very good friends, Anne. Can I walk home with you
 '
　　And when Anne came into the Green Gables kitchen, Maril-la said, 'You look very happy, Anne. Was that Gilbert who was with you just now
 '
　　'Yes, 'replied Anne, her face red. 'Gilbert and I've decided to be friends. Oh Marilla, I think life is going to be good for all of us! We'll have to work hard, but we'll be happy. And we'll keep our dear old Green Gables! What could be better than that! '



　　* * *

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Five Children and It by Edith Nesbit





■ 1 Beautiful Children
　　The house was about four kilometres from the station，but after only a minute or two the children began to ask，' Are we nearly there？'And every time they saw a house they said，' Oh， is this it？'But it never was. Then they came to the top of a hill， and there was a White house with a green garden and lots of fruit trees. ' Here we are！'Mother said.
　　Everyone hurried to get out of the carriage—— Robert，Anthea， Jane， Cyril， and Martha， the nursemaid， with the baby. But Mother did not hurry. The children ran round the house and all through the garden to see what there was. But Mother stood and watched the driver while he carried the boxes into the house.
　　The children loved the house. They knew immediately that they were going to be happy there. Mother did not like the house very much because it was old and there were no cup-boards. But it was deep in the country and after two years in London the children thought that it was wonderful. If you live in London and your family is not rich， you get bored because you cannot go to shops and theatres ，and people say，' Don't do this' and 'Don't go there. 'In the country you can go any-where and do anything.
　　The white house was on the hill， with a wood behind it and a gravel-pit on one side . It was at the gravel-pit， a week later，that the children found a fairy. Well， that was what it called itself. But it was different from other fairies.
　　It happened when Mother had to go and stay with Grand-mother，who was ill. Martha stayed with the children，of course. But the house was very quiet and empty. The children did not know what to do. Then Cyril said，' Let's go to the gravel-pit. '
　　The gravel-pit was very large， with grass and wild flowers round the sides at the top. When they got there， the children decided that they would go down into the pit to play in the sand.
　　' Let's dig a deep hole— perhaps we can get all the way down to Australia，'said Robert.
　　The others agreed and they all began to dig hard in the sand. But it was a very hot day. Baby went to sleep and Robert， Cyril， and Jane sat down to rest， but Anthea went on working on the hole.
　　Suddenly she screamed. ' Cyril！ Come here！ Quick！There's something alive！'she cried.
　　They all jumped up and hurried over to see what it was.
　　' It's got feet，'Anthea said. ' And fur. Don't hurt it. I know this sounds stupid， but it said something. '
　　' What did it say？' asked Cyril.
　　'It said，“You leave me alone. ”
　　The others just laughed， but the two boys began to move away more of the sand. Soon they could see that there really was something moving in the hole.
　　Suddenly a hard little voice cried，' Leave me alone！'
　　They all jumped back and no one spoke for a minute. Then Robert said，' But we want to see you. '
　　' Yes， I wish you'd come out，'Anthea said.
　　'Oh， well， if that's your wish，'the voice said， and the sand began to fly about everywhere. Then something brown and furry and fat fell out into the hole. ' I think I was asleep，'it said.
　　The children stood and looked at it. It really was very strange. It could move its eyes in and out on stalks， it had big ears and its body was fat and round and furry. Its legs and arms had soft fur all over them too， and it had hands and feet.
　　' What is it？' asked Jane. ' Shall we take it home？'
　　The thing turned its long eyes to look at her. ' Does she always say stupid things？'it said.
　　' She doesn't mean it，' Anthea said. ' Don't be afraid. We won't hurt you. '
　　The little thing was angry. ' Hurt me！ 'it cried. ' I'm not afraid of you！'
　　'Oh， don't be angry，'said Anthea kindly. ' Tell us who you are. We really don't know. '
　　'You don't know？'it said. ' Don't you know a Psammead when you see one？'
　　'A Sammyadd？ What's that？'Jane said .
　　' A sand-fairy， of course. Don't you know a sand-fairy when you see one？'
　　It looked very unhappy， and Jane said，' Of course！ I can see that you're a sand-fairy now. '
　　And Robert said，'Well， I didn't know that you were a Psammead， but I can see that you are something very wonder-ful. Please talk some more to us. '
　　The Psammead looked a little happier when it heard that，and it said，'Well，you can talk to me ，if you want to. Per- haps I'll answer you and perhaps I won't. Now saysomething. '
　　At first the children could not think of anything to say，but then Robert asked，' How long have you lived here？'
　　'Oh，thousands of years，' the Psammead answered.
　　The children waited， but the Psammead was silent.
　　' Please tell us more，' Robert said.
　　'Well， all right， then，'the Psammead said. ' There were lots of us then，' it went on. ' People sent their children out to look for Psammeads，and when they found us，we gave them a wish. '
　　'What happened to all the Psammeads， then？' Robert asked.
　　'Well，if they get wet，they get ill and they usually die， and that's what happened. Most of them got wet and died. And I'm not going to tell you another thing. '
　　' Oh，just one more question，please，'said Robert. ' Do you give wishes now？'
　　' You've had one，'said the Psammead. ' You wished to see me，and here I am. '
　　' Oh， please. Just one more，' Anthea cried.
　　' Well， all right， but be quick！I'm tired of you！'
　　It is very difficult to think of a really good wish， in just a second or two. Then Anthea remembered a wish of hers and Jane's. She knew that the boys wouldn't like it， but it was better than nothing.
　　' I wish we were all very， very beautiful，' she said.
　　The Psammead pushed out its long eyes and got bigger and fatter， and the children waited. Then it said，' I'm sorry. I haven't done this for a long time. I'll try again，butl can only do one wish a day for you. Do you agree to that？'
　　' Yes， oh yes！'the children cried.
　　' But remember， the wish is only for a day，'said the Psammead. ' When the sun goes down，everything goes back to what it was. '
　　The Psammead slowly got bigger， then suddenly went small again. ' That's all right！'it said. At once it turned and went back into the sand at the bottom of the hole.
　　The children stood there for a second， and then Anthea turned to speak to the others. But they were not there！ She was looking at three strangers— a girl with beautiful red hair and big blue eyes， and two very good-looking boys. Suddenly she understood. They had their wish. The strangers were Robert and Cyril and Jane—but now they were beautiful. Cyril's hair was golden now， and Robert's was black.
　　' I liked you better before！'Robert cried angrily to his brother and sisters. 'Jane's hair looks like carrots， and Cyril looks really stupid with long golden hair. '
　　They went to find Baby， but he was just the same as he was before.
　　' Perhaps it's because he's young. He can't have wishes. We'll have to remember that next time，'Anthea said，and she held out her arms to him. But Baby's mouth turned down at the corners and then he began to cry loudly. He did not know them！
　　It took an hour to stop him crying and then， very tired and cross， they took him home. Martha， Baby's nursemaid， was waiting at the front door. She took Baby from them quickly：
　　' Where are the others？'she asked. 'And who are you？'
　　' we're us，of course，' Robert said. ' You don't know us be-cause we're beautiful. '
　　' And we're very hungry，'said Cyril，'and we want our lunch， please. '
　　' Go away！'Martha screamed. ' Or I'll send for the police，'and she closed the door in their faces.
　　The children were very hungry by then， and they tried three times to get into the house—but Martha would not let them in. After a while they went and sat at the bottom of the garden to wait for the sun to go down. 'The wish will finish then， won't it？'Jane said.
　　But the others didn't answer because no one was really sure.
　　It was a terrible afternoon. They had no lunch， no tea， and they were tired， angry and afraid. It's true that they were all very beautiful，but that's not a lot of help when you'rs unhappy. In the end they fell asleep.
　　It was nearly dark when they woke up. Anthea was the first to wake up and she looked at the others. They were no longer very beautiful. Everything was all right again. Happily， they all went back to the house. Of course， Martha was angry.
　　' Where have you been all day？'she cried.
　　It is not easy to explain a Psammead to an angry nursemaid，so the children didn't try.
　　'We met some beautiful children and we couldn't get away from them until it was nearly dark，'Anthea said. ' They were terrible， and we never want to see them again. '
　　And they never have.






■ 2 The Children Wish to Be Rich
　　The next morning Martha took Baby out with her and the children decided to go back to the gravel-pit to look for the Psammead again. At first they could not find it. 'Per-haps it wasn't really here，'Robert said . But they began to dig into the sand with their hands and suddenly they came to the brown furry body of the Psammead. It sat up and shook the sand out of its fur.
　　' How are you today？'Anthea asked.
　　'Well，I didn't sleep very well，but thank you for asking，'the Psammead answered.
　　' Can you give wishes today？'Robert said. ' Because we'd like to have two，if we can. But one is a very little wish. '
　　'Well， all right，' said the Psammead， looking at Robert with its long eyes. ' Let's have the little wish first. '
　　' Martha mustn't know about the wishes，'Robert said. ' I mean， she mustn't see anything different about us. And can you do that for every wish on every day？'
　　The Psammead went a little bigger and then went small again. ' I've done that，'it said. ' It was easy. What's the next wish？'
　　' We wish，' said Robert slowly，' to be very rich. '
　　' How much money do you want？'asked the Psammead. 'It won't do you much good， of course，'it said quietly to itself. 'Well， how much—— and do you want it in gold or notes？'
　　'Gold， please，'Robert said. 'Millions！'
　　'A full gravel-pit，all right？'said the Psammead，sounding bored. ' But get out before I begin， or you'll die underneath it. '
　　Its thin arms got very long and it began to move them about. The children were afraid， and ran as fast as they could up to the road. When they were there， they turned to look back. They had to close their eyes and open them again very slowly . The gravel-pit was full， right up to the top， with new，shining，gold coins！
　　The children stood with their mouths open， and no one said a word.
　　Then Robert took one of the coins in his hand and looked at it. ' It's different from English money，'he said.
　　' Well，it doesn't matter. It's gold，'said Cyril. 'Don't for-get that it will all go when the sun goes down. Come on！ Let's put as much as we can in our pockets and go and spend it. '
　　So they all put gold coins in their pockets and went off to the village. But the gold was heavy， and soon they were very tired and hot. They decided to get something to drink in the village and then go on to the town of Rochester.
　　Cyril went into the shop and the others waited outside. But when Cyril came back with a bottle of lemonade， he said，' I had to pay with my real money. When they saw all the coins，they wouldn't change the gold. '
　　'Well， I'll try to get something with the gold，'Anthea said. ' We need a horse and cart. Come on. '
　　Anthea went to talk to a man who had a horse and cart， and the others waited. After a few minutes she came back， looking very pleased with herself. ' I wasn't stupid like Cyril，' she said. ' I only took out one coin， not all of them，and the man said he'll drive us to Rochester and wait for us. '
　　On the way to Rochester， they did not speak. They were making plans about how to spend their gold， and they did not want to talk in front of the driver.
　　But when they arrived in Rochester， with about twelve hun-dred gold coins in their pockets， they found that it was very difficult to spend them. Anthea tried to buy a very nice hat， but the woman in the shop looked very strangely，first at the gold coins， then at Anthea.
　　' I can't take that，'she said. ' It's not modern English money. '
　　They went from shop to shop， but no one wanted to take their gold. ' It's because our hands are dirty and we look untidy. People think we've stolen the gold，'Anthea said.
　　And it was worse when they tried to buy a horse and car-riage. Cyril showed the man his gold， and the man called to his son，'Send for the police！'
　　' It's our money，'said Cyril angrily. 'We're not thieves. '
　　' Where did you get it from then？'said the man.
　　' A sand-fairy gave it to us，'said Jane. ' He gives us a wish a day and they all come true. '
　　The man shook his head slowly. ' Oh dear， oh dear，'he said. 'Stealing， and then telling stories about it. '
　　Just then a policeman arrived and when he heard about the gold， he said to the four children，'Come with me. I'm taking you to the police station！'
　　The children were angry and unhappy， but the policeman walked along the road behind them and they couldn't escape. They held their heads down because they did not want anyone to see them， and suddenly Robert ran into someone. ' Robert，what have you done now？'a voice cried . It was Martha and Baby！
　　The policeman explained everything to Martha， and Cyril had to take the gold out of his pocket and show it to her.
　　' I can't see anything—just two very dirty hands，' she said. ' There's no gold there. What are you talking about？'
　　And then the children remembered that Martha couldn't see the wishes.
　　It was getting dark when they arrived at the police station. The policeman explained about the gold and the Inspector said，'Well ， let's see it. '
　　Cyril put his hands into his pockets— but they were empty！ The others put their hands into their pockets. They were empty， too！ Of course， all the fairy gold went when the sun went down！
　　' How did they do that？'cried the policeman.
　　Martha was very angry with him. ' I told you that there wasn't any gold，'she shouted. ' You'll be in trouble for this. Saying that these poor little children are thieves！'
　　But she was very angry with the children too. ' What were you doing in town alone？'she said to them outside the police station.
　　And she took them home and sent them to bed early.






■ 3 Wings
　　The next day was very wet. It rained all day and the children could not go to see the Psammead. They stayed at home and wrote letters to their mother. But none of them told her about the Psammead. And the day after that， their Uncle Richard came and took them out，so they did not see the Psammead for two days. But Anthea spent a lot of time think-ing about what to wish for.
　　The next morning， while Martha was busy with Baby， the children left the house quietly and went to see the Psammead. On the way， Anthea said to the others，' I know what we can ask for—— wings！'
　　The others were silent for a minute， but then they all agreed that they too would like to have wings.
　　They found the Psammead easily. ' I wish we all had beauti-ful wings to fly with，'Anthea said.
　　The Psammead made itself very big and then went small again. The children felt strange for a minute and when they looked， they saw that they had beautiful soft wings of many colours. They moved them about and jumped up and down， and soon they could see the green fields and sunny woodsbelow them and the blue sky above. They could fly！ It was wonderful， and they flew over the woods and trees， the townsand villages， for a long time. But they began to get hungry.
　　Just then they saw below them some trees full of large red plums. ' We mustn't steal，'Cyril said.
　　' We've got wings，'Jane answered quickly，' so we're birds. It's all right for birds to take things. Birds can't steal. '
　　So they flew down onto the trees， and they ate as many of the plums as they could.
　　They were finishing the plums when they saw a very angry little fat man，who was hurrying through the trees. They were his plums and the poor man thought that boys from the village were stealing them. But when he saw that the children had wings， his mouth fell open and his face went green. Anthea did not want to steal anything，of course， so she flew down and pushed some money into his pocket.
　　'Don't be afraid，'she said. ' We've had some of your plums. We thought that it wasn't stealing， but now I'm not so sure. So that was some money to pay for them. '
　　The little man sat there on the ground and looked up into the sky. 'Talking birds！ Children with wings！ This is a lesson for me. From now on，I'm going to live a better life，'he said. And he went into the house and was very kind to his wife.
　　Plums are very nice， of course， but you soon feel hungry again. So the children stopped first at one house，then another， to ask for something to eat. They didn't get anything because everyone was afraid of them and screamed and ran away when they saw them. By four o'clock they were getting very tired and hungry，so they flew down onto the roof of a church，to think what to do.
　　' We can't possibly fly all the way home without something to eat，'said Robert.
　　In the end they decided to take some food from the vicar's house next to the church.
　　' He's a good man . He'll understand. We'll leave some money for the food，'Cyril said，'and a note saying that we're sorry. '
　　Cyril got in through the window and gave the food to the others， who were outside. There was some cold meat， half a cold chicken， some bread and a bottle of soda-water. Then they all flew back up onto the church roof to eat it. They were very hungry， so they really enjoyed it. But when you are very hungry， and then you eat a big meal and sit in the hot sun on a roof， it is very easy to fall asleep. And so they did— while the sun slowly went down in the west.
　　They slept for a long time. When they woke up it was dark —and，of course， they had no wings.
　　' We must get home，'Cyril said. ' There's a door over there. That's the way down. '
　　But when they tried the door，they found that it was locked from the other side. They were on top of the church and they had no wings！ How were they going to get down？
　　Anthea put her arm round Jane， who was beginning to cry. 'It will only be for one night，'she said.
　　Then Cyril said，'I know. Let's shout！ The lights are on inthe vicar's house. Someone will hear us and get us down. '
　　So they shouted and screamed as loudly as they could， and the people in the house heard them. The vicar ran out with his servant.
　　' Someone is murdering somebody in the church！'the vicar said， afraid. 'Perhaps it's the thief who stole the cold chicken and things. '
　　But they could not understand why the voices were coming from the sky. So the children shouted，' We're up here —on top of the church！'
　　The two men were still afraid，but，slowly and carefully，they went up the stairs inside the church. When they came to the top， the vicar shouted through the closed door，'How many of you are there？ Have you got guns？'
　　' There are four of us，and， no， we haven't got guns，'Cyril answered.
　　Slowly， the vicar opened the door.
　　'Good Heavens！'he cried. 'They're children！'
　　' Oh， please take us down，'cried Jane.
　　So the vicar and his servant took them down and into the vicar's house. Of course， the vicar wanted to know why the children were on the church roof.
　　' We went up there because we wanted to see what it was like，'said Cyril. 'But then we couldn't get down again be-cause the door was locked. 'He didn't say anything about the wings，of course.
　　' But who locked the door？'the vicar asked.
　　' We don't know，'Jane answered. ' But we're not telling you everything. '
　　'Ah！ There's a friend in it， then，'said the vicar's servant man， who was called Beale.
　　' Yes， but we can't tell you about him，' said Anthea， think-ing of the Psammead. ' We really are very sorry， and please，can we go home now？ '
　　The vicar still did not understand，but he was a kind man， so he sent the children home in a carriage with his servant. Martha，of course， was very angry with them， but Mr Beale explained everything very well. He was a good-looking young man with a nice smile，and after a while Martha forgot to be angry.
　　So the day ended happily after all.






■ 4 Bigger than the Baker's Boy
　　The next morning Martha said that the children could not go out. ' You can stay in and be good，' she said.
　　' There's something that we all want，' said Robert. ' Can I just go out for half an hour to get it？' And Martha，who was really very kind，said that he could.
　　Of course， they all wanted the day's wish. So Robert hur-ried to the sand-pit.
　　The Psammead was waiting for him， but when Robert tried to think of a really good wish， he couldn't， and the others were not there to help him.
　　' Hurry up，'the Psammead said. ' I can't wait all day. '
　　' Oh dear，'Robert said. ' I wish that we didn't have to come here to get our wish… Oh， don't！'
　　But it was too late. The Psammead was already making it-self big.
　　'There！' it said. ' That wasn't easy， but I've done it. You don't need to come here to have your wish. '
　　Robert thanked the Psammead and then hurried back to tell the other children. ' We must wish for something really good tomorrow，'he said.
　　The next morning they thought and thought，but they couldn't think of a really good wish，so they decided to go to the gravel-pit. Suddenly they saw a baker's boy，who was coming along the road with his basket of bread， and they decided to play a game with him.
　　' Stop！' cried Cyril.
　　' Your money or your life！'shouted Robert.
　　And they stood on each side of the baker's boy.
　　The baker's boy，who was tall and large， was not very interested and he pushed them both away.
　　'Don't be stupid！' he said.
　　But Robert pushed him back and knocked him over. The bread fell out of the boy's basket and went all over the road. The baker's boy was very angry. He hit Robert and they began to fight. But the baker's boy was much bigger and stronger than Robert. He was also not a nice fighter— he pulled Robert's hair， kicked him in the leg， and hit him hard in the stomach. Then he picked up his bread， put it back in the basket， and went on his way.
　　Cyril wanted to help Robert， but the girls held his arms and stopped him. So Cyril was angry with the girls，and everybody was unhappy. They went along to the gravel-pit， and Robert began to kick the sand angrily. ' I'll teach that baker's boy a lesson one day，'he said. 'I wish I was bigger than him！'
　　Just then they saw that the Psammead was sitting behind them， and was watching them！
　　The next minute， Robert had his wish. He was bigger than the baker's boy！ Much， much bigger！ He was now more than three metres tall！He was not pleased because he looked very strange next to the others， who were still small.
　　The others felt sorry for him then， and asked the Psammead for another wish . But the Psammead was very cross and un-helpful. 'Why don't you think before you wish？'it said. ' He's a wild， noisy boy， and he can stay like that for the day. It will do him good. Now go away and leave me alone！'
　　The others turned back to their enormous brother. ' What are we going to do？'They asked.
　　'First，'said Robert，' I'm going to get that baker's boy！'And because he had very long legs， he arrived at the bottom of the hill long before the baker's boy， who was stopping at the houses along the road to leave the bread.
　　Robert hid behind a haystack and waited for the boy . When he saw the baker's boy coming，he jumped out from behind the haystack and the boy's mouth fell open in surprise. Then Robert took hold of him and put him on top of the haystack.
　　' Now get down from there，if you can！' Robert said.
　　It was very late when the baker's boy got back to the shop，and the baker was very angry！
　　Then Robert and the others went home，and down to the bottom of the garden. Anthea asked Martha to bring their lunch out there. She knew that Robert was too big to get into the house. Of course， Martha could not see that Robert was much bigger than before， and she only gave him as much meat and potatoes as usual— and no more. Poor Robert was very hungry.
　　The others were feeling unhappy too because there was a fair in town and they wanted to go to it. ' We can't go anywhere now，'Cyril said. ' Not with Robert like this. '
　　Suddenly Jane cried，'I know！ Let's take Robert to the fair！Someone there will pay us to show him to people. We can make a lot of money. '
　　The others thought that this was a good plan， and they left at once. When they arrived， they asked to see the head man. His name was Bill，and when he saw Robert， he got very excited.
　　' How much do you want for him？'he asked.
　　' You can't buy me，'said Robert，' but I'll come and show myself this afternoon，if you give me fifteen pounds—and some food！'
　　' Right！'Bill agreed.
　　So Bill took Robert inside one of the big fair tents and gave him something to eat. But while Robert was eating， Bill put men outside to stop him from escaping.
　　Then Bill stood outside the tent and began to shout to the crowds. ' Come and see the biggest man in the world！'he cried.
　　Very soon， people began to stop and listen. A young man and his girlfriend were the first to go and look at Robert. They paid their money to Bill and wnet in . The people outside heard a loud scream from the girl，and then they all wanted to go in too.
　　Soon Robert was the most exciting thing to see at the fair，and Bill was making a lot of money. ' Much more than fifteen pounds！' Cyril said to the girls.
　　Poor Robert got very bored. He had to shake hands with everybody and talk， to show that he was real. And how could he escape at the end of the day？' They'll kill us when I go small again，' he said.
　　Cyril thought for a minute. Then he said，' I've got a plan，'and he went outside the tent to talk to Bill. 'Look here，' he said，' my brother must be alone when the sun goes down. He gets very strange and angry then. I don't know why， but you must leave him alone， or he'll hurt someone. '
　　Bill was not very happy about this， but he agreed， and when the sun went down， they left Robert alone. Robert quickly got out under the back wall of the tent， and no one knew who he was because he was just a small boy again.
　　The children ran all the way home— and we do not know what Bill said when he found that Robert was not there！






■ 5 The Last Wish
　　The next day there was a letter to say that the children's mother was coming home that afternoon. So they decided to wish for something for their mother. They were busy trying to think of something when Martha came into the room，very excited.
　　' There were thieves at Lady Chittenden's last night，'she said. ' They took all her jewels！ She's got lots of beautiful dia-monds— they cost thousands of pounds， I've heard. '
　　' When I'm older，I'm going to buy Mother jewels like that ，'Robert said.
　　' I'd lide Mother to have all Lady Chittenden's beautiful jewels now，'said jane. ' I wish she could. '
　　'Oh Jane ！'cried the others. ' What have you said？'
　　'Well， she will have them，'said Robert. ' You've wished！Everyont will think she stole them！ We'll have to try to find the Psammead and ask it to take the wish back. '
　　They hurried down to the gravel-pit，but they could not find the Psammead. So they hurried home again and looked in their mother's room for the jewels， but they were not there yet.
　　' Well， we'll tell Mother about the Psammead， and she'll give back the jewels when they come，'Anthea said.
　　Cyril shook his head slowly. ' She isn't going to believe us. Can anyone believe about a Psammead if they haven't seen it？And adults never believe things like that. No，she'll think we are the thieves and we'll all go to prison， and everything will be terrible！'
　　And that afternoon，when Mother came home， the children ran to meet her， and put their arms round her— and tried to stop her from going upstairs to her room.
　　' But I must take my coat off， and wash my hands！'she cried， laughing. And she went up to her room.
　　The children went after her— and there， on the table， was a green box. Mother opened it.
　　' Oh，how beautiful！' she cried.
　　It was a ring. A beautiful diamond ring.
　　' Perhaps it's a surprise present from Father，' she said. ' But how did it get here？'
　　But then she found a diamond necklace— and brooches—and bracelets. There were jewels in every cupboard in her room. The children began to look unhappy， and Jane began to cry.
　　Mother was no longer smiling. ' Jane， what do you know about this？'she said slowly. ' The true story， please. '
　　' We met a sand-fairy， Mother，'Jane began.
　　' Don't be stupid，Jane，'Mother said angrily.
　　'Some thieves stole all Lady Chittenden's jewels from her house last night，'Cyril said quickly. ' Perhaps these are her jewels！'
　　Then Mother called for Martha. ' Have any strangers been inthis room， Martha？' she asked.
　　' Yes， but it was just my young man，' Martha answered，afraid. ' He was moving a heavy cupboard for me. '（This， of course，was Mr Beale，the vicar's nice young servant，who was now very friendly with Martha. ）
　　So，of course，Mother thought that he was one of the thieves. She would not listen to the children and decided to go at once into town to tell the police. The children could not stop her.
　　' This is terrible！' said Anthea. ' Poor Martha！ And poor Mr Beale—he isn't a thief！ What are we going to do？' Then she cried，' Come on！ We must find the Psammead！'
　　They all hurried down to the gravel-pit， and this time they found the Psammead， sitting on the sand and enjoying the evening sun. When it saw them， it tried to get away， but Anthea put her arms round it. ' Dear，kind Psammead…'she began.
　　' Oh， you want something， don't you？' it said. 'Well，I can't give you any more wishes today. '
　　' Don't you like giving wishes？'Anthea asked.
　　' No， I don't，'he said . ' Go away and leave me alone！'
　　But Anthea went on. ' Listen，'she said. ' If you do what we want today，we'll never ask you for another wish. '
　　'I'll do anything for that，'it said. ' I really don't enjoy giv-ing wishes. It's very hard work， you know， and I get so tired. '
　　'Well， first I wish that Lady Chittenden will find that she has never lost her jewels. '
　　The Psammead got bigger， and then went small again. 'Done！'it said.
　　'I wish that Mother won't get to the police. '
　　'Done！'the Psammead said again.
　　' And I wish，' said Jane suddenly，'that Mother and Martha will forget all about the jewels. '
　　'Done！'the Psammead said， but its voice was tired. 'Now，it went on ，' will you wish something for me？'
　　'Can't you give yourself wishes？' asked Cyril.
　　'Of course not，'the Psammead said. 'Wish that you will never tell anyone about me. '
　　' Why？' asked Robert.
　　' Well， you children always ask for stupid things. But adults aren't like that. If they get hold of me，they'll want to wish for real， important things—like free houses for poor people，and new schools for children everywhere in the country，and money to give to old people. Boring things like that. And they'll find a way to keep them after the sun goes down. And what will happen to the world if all those changes come at once ？ There'll be terrible trouble. So go on ， wish it！ Quick！'
　　Anthea said the Psammead's wish，and it got very，very big. When it was small again， it said，' Now， I'm very tired. Do you want one last wish？'
　　'Thank you for everything，'said Jane. ' Have a good long sleep— and I wish that we'll see you again someday. '
　　Then，for the last time， the Psammead went big，then small again. It looked at them all once more with its long eyes，and then dug itself quickly into the sand.
　　And when they arrived home again，everything was all right. Mother came home and she and Martha remembered nothing， and Lady Chittenden found that her jewels were not lost.
　　' Will we ever see the Psammead again， do you think？'Jane said to the others， later in the garden.
　　And，of course，they did， but not in this story. It was in a very， very different place. It was in a… But I must say no more.




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Frankenstein by Mary Shelley





■ 1
　　‘Captain！ Something is moving on the ice．Look over there！’
　　The sailor stood at the top of the mast， high above the Captain． His hand pointed away from the ship， across the miles of ice that covered the sea．
　　The Captain looked to the north， where the sailor was pointing． He saw something coming fast towards the ship across the ice． He put his telescope to his eye， and through it he could see the shapes of ten dogs pulling a sledge over the ice． He could also see the driver of the sledge—a huge figure，much bigger than a man．
　　The sledge came nearer and nearer to the sea． Soon it was only a quarter of a mile from the ship．No one needed a telescope now to see the huge figure of the driver．
　　Suddenly the sledge went behind a mountain of ice and disappeared． At that moment another sledge appeared． It， too，was moving fast， and was clearly chasing the first sledge． This driver was a smaller figure， more like an ordinary man．Faster and faster the dogs ran；then the second sledge also disappeared behind the mountain of ice．
　　Two hours passed． The sledges did not appear again． Nothing moved on the ice． Soon night came， and in the night there was a storm． In the morning，the sailors saw that great pieces of ice were floating round the ship．Suddenly the sailor on the mast shouted again：
　　‘Captain， I can see a man on the ice．’
　　The sailor was pointing to a piece of ice that was floating near the ship． A man was sitting on the ice， and near him was a broken sledge． The man was nearly dead from cold and could not walk． The sailors carried him carefully onto the ship， and took him to the Captain， who said：
　　‘Welcome to my ship．I am the Captain and my name is Robert Walton．’
　　‘Thank you， Captain Walton，’ the man said．‘My name is Frankenstein， Victor Frankenstein．’
　　Then he fainted and said no more．
　　Two days passed before the man was strong enough to talk and then the Captain asked him to tell his story．
　　‘I am trying to catch someone，’ said Frankenstein．‘That is why I have come so far north on the ice．’
　　‘We saw you following someone，’ the Captain said．‘He was huge， much bigger than a man． We saw his sledge just in front of you on the night before the storm．’
　　‘I am pleased you all saw that huge figure，’ Frankenstein said．‘Perhaps that will help you to believe my story．’
　　During the days， while the Captain worked on the ship，Frankenstein wrote down his story， and each evening he read what he had written to the Captain．
　　Here is Victor Frankenstein's story．



■ 1



■ Victor Frankensteom's Story Begins



■ 2
　　I was born in Switzerland， in the town of Geneva． My parents loved each other very much， and I learnt from the example of their love．I learnt that to love and to be patient are the most important things in the world．
　　My mother hoped to have a daughter after I was born， but for five years I was the only child． And then my mother found a sister for me．She was helping a family in which there were five children． They were very poor，and the children were thin and hungry． One of the children was a little girl， with golden hair and blue eyes Her name was Elizabeth． My mother took the little girl into our family，and Elizabeth became the daughter that my mother had always wanted． As I grew older， my love for Elizabeth became stronger all the time．
　　Later my mother had two other sons， Ernest and William．A young woman called Justine came to live in the house to help my mother with the children． We loved her as much as she loved us．
　　The years passed happily， and we had everything that we needed． At school I met another very fine person． His name was Henry Clerval， and he was very clever． My family also liked him very much， so he was a welcome visitor to our house．
　　I studied very hard at school．I wanted to know the secrets of life， and， most of all， I wanted to know how to make living things．I read all the books that I could find．One day，some－thing happened that added a new idea to the ideas that I al－ready had．I was fifteen at the time， and we were on holiday in the mountains． There was a wild storm， and with it came the most frightening thunder and lightning that I had ever seen in my life． About twenty metres in front of our house was a great tree．Suddenly a huge fork of lightning hit the tree．After a few seconds， there was nothing left of it except a black piece of wood two metres high． The lightning had destroyed it．
　　I saw how strong electricity was． I began to read all the books that I could find about electricity and its terrible power．






■ 2



■ 3
　　For seventeen years my life was very happy． Then the first sad thing happened． My mother became very ill，and soon she knew that she was dying． Just before she died，she asked Elizabeth and me to go to her room． She held our hands and said：
　　‘My children， I am very happy because you love each other，and because one day you will get married． Everyone in the family loves you， Elizabeth． Will you take my place in the family， my dear？ I can die happy if you will look after them when I have gone．’
　　My mother died， and we were very sad， because we loved her dearly Elizabeth was brave and helped us； her sweet smile gave us some happiness in the unhappy days after my mother's death．
　　The time came for me to go to university．I did not want to leave my sad family， but we all knew that I should go． It was hard to leave， too， because the parents of my good friend Henry Clerval would not let him go to university with me． And so I had to go alone．
　　On my first day at the university I met my teacher， Professor Waldman， who was one of the greatest scientists in the world． He gave a wonderful talk to all the students who were starting at the university． He ended his talk by saying：‘Some of you will become the great scientists of tomorrow． You must study hard and discover everything that you can． That is why God made you intelligent—to help other people．’
　　After the professor's talk，I thought very carefully．I remembered the storm when I was fifteen． I remembered how the lightning had destroyed the tree．I wanted to use electricity to help people， and I wanted to discover the secrets of life．I decided to work on these two things． I did not know then that my work would destroy me and the people that I loved．
　　I started work the next day． I worked very hard and soon Professor Waldman and I realized that I could learn to be a very good scientist．
　　The professor helped me very much， and other important scientists who were his friends helped me，too． I was interested in my work and I did not take one day's holiday during the next two years． I did not go home， and my letters to my family were very short．
　　After two years I had discovered many things and I built a scientific machine that was better than anything in the university． My machine would help me answer the most important question of all． How does life begin？ Is it possible to put life into dead things？ To answer these questions about life I had to learn first about death．I had to watch bodies from the moment when they died and the warm life left them． In the hospital and in the university， I watched the dying and the dead．Day after day， month after month， I followed death．It was a dark and terrible time．
　　Then one day， the answer came to me． Suddenly I was sure that I knew the secret of life． I knew that I could put life into a body that was not alive．
　　I worked harder and harder now． I slept for only a short time each night， and I did not eat much food．I wrote to my family less often． But they loved me and did not stop writing to me．They said they understood how busy I was． They did not want me to stop work to write or to see them． They would wait until I had more time． They hoped to see me very soon．
　　The professors realized that I was doing very important work， and so they gave me my own laboratory． There was a small flat above the laboratory， where I lived， and sometimes I stayed inside the building for a week and did not go out．
　　Above the laboratory I built a very tall mast． It was 150metres high， and higher than the tallest building in the city．The mast could catch lightning and could send the electricity down to my machine in the laboratory． I had never forgotten the lightning that had destroyed the tree． There had been so much power in the electricity of that lightning． I believed I could use that electricity to give life to things that were dead．
　　I will say no more than that． The secret of my machine must die with me． I was a very clever scientist， but I did not realize then what a terrible mistake I was making．



■ 3



■ 4
　　In my laboratory I made a body． I bought or stole all the pieces of human body that I needed， and slowly and carefully， I put them all together．
　　I did not let anybody enter my laboratory or my flat while I was doing this awful work． I was afraid to tell anybody my terrible secret．
　　I had wanted to make a beautiful man， but the face of the creature was horrible． Its skin was thin and yellow， and its eyes were as yellow as its skin． Its long black hair and white teeth were almost beautiful， but the rest of the face was very ugly．
　　Its legs and arms were the right shape， but they were huge．I had to use big pieces because it was too difficult to join small pieces together． My creature was two and a half metres tall．
　　For a year I had worked to make this creature， but now it looked terrible and frightening． I almost decided to destroy it．But I could not． I had to know if I could put life into it．
　　I joined the body to the wires from my machine． More wires joined the machine to the mast． I was sure that my machine could use electricity from lightning to give life to the body． I watched and waited．Two days later I saw dark clouds in the sky， and I knew that a storm was coming． At about one o'clock in the morning the lightning came．My mast began to do its work immediately， and the electricity from the lightning travelled down the mast to my machine． Would the machine work？
　　At first nothing happened． But after a few minutes I saw the creature's body begin to move．Slowly， terribly， the body came alive． His arms and legs began to move， and slowly he sat up．
　　The dead body had been an ugly thing， but alive， he was much more horrible． Suddenly I wanted to escape from him． I ran out of the laboratory， and locked the door． I was filled with fear at what I had done．
　　For hours I walked up and down in my flat． At last I lay down on my bed， and fell asleep． But my sleep was full of terrible dreams， and I woke up suddenly． The horrible thing that I had created was standing by my bed． His yellow eyes were looking at me； his mouth opened and he made strange sounds at me． On his yellow face there was an awful smile． One of his huge hands reached towards me…
　　Before he could touch me， I jumped off the bed and ran downstairs into the garden． I stayed there all night， but I could not think clearly．I was afraid． And when morning came， I went out into the town and began to walk about．
　　I did not notice where I was walking， but soon I came to the station． A train from Geneva had just arrived， and the passengers were leaving the station． One of them ran towards me when he saw me． It was my dear friend Henry Clerval．
　　He was very pleased to see me． He took my hand and shook it warmly．
　　‘My dear Victor！’ he said．‘What a lucky chance that you are here at the station． Your father， and Elizabeth and the others， are very worried about you， because you have not visited them for a long time． They ask me to make sure that you are well． And I have very good news． My father has agreed to let me study at the university， so we shall be able to spend a lot of time together．’
　　I was very happy to hear this news， and for a moment I for-got my fears．I took Henry back to my flat and asked him to wait outside while I went in to look． I was afraid that the creature was still there． But he had disappeared．At that time I did not think of other people， and what the creature could do to them．I took Henry into the flat and cooked a meal for us．But Henry noticed how thin I was，and that I was laughing too much and could not sit still．
　　Suddenly he said：‘My dear Victor， what is the matter with you？Are you ill？ Has something awful happened？’
　　‘Don't ask me that，’ I cried． I put my hands over my eyes．I thought I could see the horrible creature there in front of me． I pointed wildly across the room， and shouted：‘He can tell you． Save me！ Save me！’ I tried to fight the creature，but there was nothing there． Then I fainted and fell to the floor．
　　Poor Henry！ I do not know what he thought． He called a doctor and they put me to bed． I was very ill for two months，and Henry stayed and looked after me． His loving care saved me from death．
　　I wanted to go home and see my family as soon as possible．When I was well enough，I packed my clothes and books．All my luggage was ready， and I was feeling very happy when the postman arrived with some letters．One of the letters ended my short time of happiness．



■ 4



■ 5
　　The letter was from my father in Geneva， and this is what he wrote：
　　My dear Victor，
　　I want you to know before you arrive home that an awful thing has happened．Your dear youngest brother，William，is dead． He was murdered． It happened last Thursday evening when Elizabeth and I and your two brothers， Ernest and William， went for a walk outside the city． William and Ernest were playing． William had hidden from Ernest， and Ernest asked Elizabeth and me to help find William． We all began to search for him， but we couldn't find him． We searched all night． At five in the morning I found him． He was lying on the grass， white and still． I could see the marks of fingers on his neck—the murderer had strangled him．
　　Elizabeth had let him wear a gold chain of hers round his neck．On the chain was a very small picture of your mother．We all think that someone murdered William to steal the gold chain．Poor Elizabeth is terribly unhappy at William's death． She thinks he died because she let him wear the chain． Hurry home， my dear Victor． You are the only one who can help Elizabeth， and we all need you．
　　With all our love，
　　Your Father
　　Henry helped me to catch the train． The journey seemed very long， and it was late at night before the train reached Geneva． I decided to spend the night in a village outside the town and go home early in the morning． I wanted to see the place where William had died．
　　As I started my walk， a storm broke and lightning lit the sky． The police had put posts round the place where the murderer had strangled William，so I found it easily．I cried sadly as I stood there． My poor brother had been a kind and happy boy， and we had all loved him．
　　Again the lightning lit the sky， and I saw a huge figure standing in the rain． When I saw it， I knew at once what it was．It was the creature that I had made．
　　What was he doing there？But although I asked myself the question， I knew the answer． He had murdered my brother． I was sure that I was right．
　　I decided to try and catch him．But as I moved， he ran to－wards the mountains． He ran much faster than any man． He climbed the mountain easily， reached the top， and disappeared．
　　I stood there in the dark and the rain， and knew that I had created a monster． And he had murdered my brother．



■ 5



■ 6
　　At first I decided to tell the police my story． But would they believe me？ I had been very ill． When the police learnt about my illness， they would think the monster was just one of my bad dreams． I decided that I could not tell anybody．
　　I went home to my family and they were very pleased to see me． Then they told me that the police had found the murderer． Perhaps you will think that this was good news，but I have not told you who the police had arrested．
　　As I went into the house，I noticed that one person did not come to meet me． It was Justine，the young woman who looked after the children and who was like a sister to us． And it was Justine that the police had arrested．
　　A few days after the murder， the police had searched the house and had found the gold chain in Justine's coat pocket．Everyone in the family knew that Justine had not murdered William． I knew who the murderer was， but I could not tell anyone． We were sure that Justine would be free after the trial， because nobody could believe that she was a murderer．But we were wrong．
　　The trial did not go well for Justine． There were a number of strange facts that were difficult to explain， and the judge decided that she was the murderer． The punishment for murder was death． We argued and cried． We said she could not murder anyone． But nothing could change the judge's order．
　　So I got up early and went to the judge's house and told him about the monster． He did not believe me． He thought I was lying in order to save Justine's life．
　　In the prison Justine waited quietly for death． We spent many hours with her， and she spoke calmly and kindly to us．She was happy because we believed that she had not killed William． And she was almost looking forward to death， be－cause then she would be with William and our dear mother in a place of peace．
　　Her love and gentleness added to my great unhappiness． I knew she was going to die because of me． I knew my brother had died because of me． I had brought nothing but sadness and misery to my family．
　　I took a boat and went out on Lake Geneva． Why didn't I end my life then？ Two things stopped me． My father was old and another death would probably kill him． And I had to stay alive—to keep my family safe from the monster．
　　Fear for my family and hate for my monster were with me day and night． I became ill again， and Elizabeth's love could not help me． I needed o escape for a while—to leave my unhappiness behind me．So I went to walk alone in the Alps． I hoped the wild beauty of the mountains would help me．
　　Slowly I became calmer among the beautiful mountains． I learnt to sleep again， and for days I did not see anybody． Then one morning I saw a figure coming towards me faster than any man could go． It jumped easily over the rocks and I saw with horror the monster that I had created． On his face was a look of deep sadness， but also of evil． At first I could not speak be－cause I hated him so much． But at last I said：
　　‘You are an evil creature． I shall kill you if I can， because you have killed two people that I love．’
　　The monster's yellow eyes looked at me．‘I am the unhappiest creature in the world， but I shall fight for my life，’ he said．‘I am bigger and stronger than you， but I will not start the fight． I shall always be gentle to you because you are my king and creator． You made me， and you should love me and be kind to me， like a father． William and Justine died because you did not love me． Why did you create me if you were not ready to love me？’
　　‘We are enemies，’ I said．‘Leave me now，or let us fight until one of us is dead．You are a murderer． How can I be kind to you？’
　　‘You say I am a murderer，’ the monster said，‘but you want to kill your own creature． Isn't that wrong，too？ I ask you to do one thing for me—listen．Come with me to a warmer place， and listen to my story．Then you can decide．’
　　I thought carefully about what he had said．It was true that I had given him life but I had not given him love．I decided to go with him and listen to his story．
　　He took me to a mountain hut where he lit a fire． We sat down by the fire and he began to tell me his story．



■ 6



■ The Monster's Story



■ 7
　　After I had left the laboratory， I escaped into the country outside the town． I soon felt hungry and thirsty，and my first food was fruit which I found on some trees near a river． I drank from the river and then lay down and went to sleep．
　　At first my eyes and ears did not work very well，but after a while I began to see and hear clearly．
　　One day， snow began to fall． Of course， I had never walked in snow before， and I found that it made my feet very cold． I realized that I needed food and a place to get warm．Soon I saw a small hut where an old man was cooking his breakfast over a fire． When the old man saw me， he shouted loudly and ran away as fast as he could． I did not understand what the man was doing， but I wanted to be near the fire． So I sat down in the warm， and ate the man's breakfast． Then I walked across empty fields for some hours until I reached a village． I went into one of the houses， but there were children inside． They began to scream when they saw me， and their mother fainted． The whole village came to see what was the trouble． Some of the people ran away when they saw me， but the others shouted and threw stones at me．They wanted to kill me． I was badly hurt， but I escaped and ran into the open country．
　　Later， I found an empty hut， which was built against the wall of a small house． I was afraid to go into the house after what had happened in the village， so I hid in the hut． There I was safe， and could escape from the cold， and hide from people who wished to hurt me．
　　And then I found that there was a small hole in the wall between the hut and the house．Through this hole I could see in－to the room next to the hut． Three people lived in the house—a beautiful girl， an old man， and a young man．
　　Day after day I watched the three people．I saw how kind they were to each other． I wanted so much to go into the house and be with them， but I knew I must stay in the hut． I could not forget how the village people had hurt me when I tried to go into the house there．
　　Each night， after the people in the house had gone to bed，I stole some of their food for myself． But soon I realized that the old man was blind． And I realized too that often the three of them did not have enough to eat．I saw the two young people put extra food on the blind man's plate， although they were hungry themselves．
　　When I saw that，I stopped stealing their food．Their life was already hard enough， so I went back to the wild fruit in the woods． I tried to help them in other ways， too．During the night I cut firewood for them， and added it secretly to the wood which the young man had cut during the day． I was very happy to see how much this pleased the young man．
　　After a while I began to understand some of the noises that the people made to each other． The first words that I under－stood were words like ‘fire’， and‘bread’． I also learnt that the three people called each other by names． The girl was Agatha， the young man was Felix， and the old man was called Father． I tried to make the noises that they made， and slowly I began to speak．
　　The two young people were very beautiful． One day I saw my own face in the water of the river． It was a terrible face．I understood why people were frightened， why they shouted and threw stones． I knew then that I could not let these beautiful people see me． They would be frightened by my horrible face and body．
　　Summer was coming， and I continued to watch and learn． I also continued to help the two people and their father， and did many jobs for them in the night． They were always surprised in the morning when they saw what I had done． I heard them talk about the ‘good creature’ who did these‘wonderful’things．
　　But the family were often sad， and I wished I could make them happy．I looked forward to the time when I could speak well enough to talk to them． And I was happy because I was sure I would soon have three good friends．






■ 7



■ 8
　　One day in summer a lady on horseback rode up to the house and knocked on the door． She had dark hair，and was very beautiful． The family were all very pleased to see her． I soon learnt that her name was Sophie．
　　She could not speak the family's language， and each evening Felix taught her some words． This was a very great help to me， because I was able to learn the meaning of many words that I had not been able to understand before． Felix taught Sophie from books about what had happened in the world in the past．So I learnt about the Greeks and Romans，and about Christ， and about the first white men in America and the sad story of the Indians． I could not understand why men who knew all about good and evil could hate and kill each other．
　　I learnt other things too． I learnt that people think it is very important to have money and to come from a good family．I learnt of the love between mother and father and child． And I realized that I had no family． The more I learnt， the more I thought，and the more unhappy I became．
　　Soon I discovered who Sophie was． The two families had met in France after Sophie and her father arrived there from Turkey， their own country． Sophie's father was put in prison by the French， but Felix and his father helped him to escape and leave France． When the French discovered this，Felix and his family lost all their lands and money， and had to leave France for ever． Now I knew why they were so sad， and why they were poor．
　　But that was not all． Sophie and Felix loved each other， and Sophie's father had promised that they could marry．Then，when he learnt that Felix had lost all his money， he broke his promise． But Sophie loved Felix very much，so she took some money and escaped from her father to search for Felix．
　　I had learnt to love these good people and I could not wait another day to introduce myself． I decided to speak first to the father， because he was blind， and would not be frightened by my terrible face and body．
　　One day the three young people went for a walk while the old man rested． When they had gone， I went to the door of the house and knocked on it．
　　The old man told me to enter， and to sit down．
　　‘Thank you，’ I said．‘I am a traveller， and I'm tired and sad． I have no family or friends． The people that I want to have as my friends have never seen me．If they don't take me into their home， I shall be alone in the world．’
　　‘Don't be so sad，’ the old man said．‘You will find that the hearts of men are full of love． If these friends are good people， they will welcome you．’
　　‘They are kind， and the best people in the world，’ I said．‘But when they meet me， they may not see a kind creature who has helped them． Instead they may see a monster， and they will hate me．’
　　‘That mustn't happen，’the old man said．‘My family and I have had our difficult times， and we'll help you．’
　　‘You are a very good man，’ I said，‘and if you help me， I shall be able to live with my friends and enjoy their love．’
　　At that moment I heard the young people returning from their walk．I caught the old man's hand， and cried，‘Now is the time！Save me and help me！ You and your family are the friends that I am talking about．’
　　Then the door opened， and in came Felix， Sophie， and Agatha．Their faces were filled with horror and fear when they saw me．Agatha fainted， and Sophie ran out of the house．Felix ran forward and pulled me away from his father．He threw me to the ground and hit me again and again with his heavy stick．I did not lift a hand against him．I did not want to hurt him—or any of them． My heart was heavy， and all hope left me． I ran out of the house and later returned silently to my hut． Nobody saw me．



■ 8



■ 9
　　Isat in my dark hut， and felt both angry and sad． One half of me wanted to hurt the people who had hurt me．The other half of me still loved them． In the end I decided to try to speak to the old man again． I fell into an unhappy sleep，but when I woke in the morning， the family had gone． They had left the house during the night．
　　I knew the name of only one other person． Although I had seen you， Frankenstein， for only a few moments， I knew that I belonged to you．When I had left your house，I had picked up a small bag． There was a book in the bag， and I could now read it． From it I learnt my creator's name and address．You had made me， but why had you not looked after me， and saved me from this pain and unhappiness？ I decided to go to Geneva， to find you．
　　One day as I was travelling， I saw a young girl running along the side of a river． Suddenly she fell into the water．I jumped into the river， fought against the fast－moving water，and brought her back to land． While I was doing this， the girl's father， who was looking for her， reached us．He was carrying a gun，and when he saw me，he fired．The bullet hit my arm and broke it． I fell to the ground in great pain， and the man and the girl ran into the woods as fast as they could，and left me．
　　The bullet was deep in my arm， and I lost a lot of blood．After some days my arm began to get better， but I became sadder and angrier than before． I had saved the girl's life， and how did they thank me？ With a bullet in the arm！I began to realize that there was no happiness for me in life． Hate grew stronger in me every day ．Hate for you， my creator， who had made me．
　　Two months later， I reached Geneva． That evening I hid among some trees outside the town， and went to sleep． But I woke when a little boy ran into my hiding place． I thought I would catch the child and make him my friend before he was old enough to be frightened of my terrible face．I caught the little boy， but when the child saw me， he covered his eyes with his hands and screamed loudly．
　　‘Let me go， you monster，’the child shouted．‘Let me go，or I will tell my father， Mr Frankenstein．He will call the police，and they'll punish you．’
　　‘Frankenstein！’I shouted．‘You belong to my enemy， the man that I want to hurt．’
　　The child fought and screamed， and I put my hand round his neck to stop him shouting．In a moment， the child lay dead at my feet．I looked down at his body， and was pleased with what I had done． I knew that the death of this child would hurt you，Victor Frankenstein，my creator．
　　Then I saw something bright round the child's neck． It was a gold chain，and on the end of it was a picture of a very beau－tiful woman．I knew that a beautiful woman would never smile at me， and I wanted to run into Geneva and kill as many people as I could．But I stopped myself，and went to look for an-other hiding place．Soon I found a hut， which seemed to be empty，but when I entered I saw a pretty young woman asleep on the floor． I hated her because she was pretty．So I put the gold chain into one of her pockets， and then， before she could wake up， I ran away．I knew the police would think that she had killed the little boy．



■ 9



■ Victor Frankenstein Continues His Story



■ 10
　　The monster finished telling me his story， and then he said：
　　‘I am alone and miserable． Only someone as ugly as I am could love me．You must make another creature like me， a woman monster to be my wife．’
　　‘I shall never make another creature like you，’I shouted
　　‘You have done enough evil on your own．’
　　‘If you don't help me，I shall make you more miserable than you have ever been in your life．You will wish you were dead，’the monster said．‘But if you make another monster to be my friend， we won't hurt anyone．Be kind to me now，and I will learn to love and be kind．’
　　I thought long and hard about the monster's words．I felt sorry for him．He was so miserable．Perhaps I should help him．
　　‘I shall do what you ask，’I told him．‘But you must promise to live somewhere in the world where nobody lives．You must promise to stay away from other people．’
　　‘I promise！I promise！he cried．‘Please start your work．I shall watch you，and when you are ready，you can be sure I will come back．’ He turned and left me，and ran down the mountain．
　　I went back to Geneva immediately．My family were very worried when they saw me．I was pale and my eyes were wild．I could not forget my promise to the monster， and the awful work that waited for me． But I had to do it．It was the only way to keep my family safe… safe from his murdering hands around their necks．
　　I needed to study for several months to make a woman monster successfully．I heard that an English scientist had done some useful work，so I decided to go to England． Before I went， my father asked me：‘Are you going to marry Elizabeth，or do you love another woman？Is this why you are so unhappy？’
　　‘No， father，’I replied．‘I have always loved Elizabeth，and I want to marry her．But I must do one more piece of scientific work before we can marry．I must go to England to do the work and I want to marry Elizabeth when I return．’
　　My father and Elizabeth did not want me to go to England alone，because I had been so ill．They spoke to my old friend Henry Clerval，and he was very happy to travel with me．I was pleased that he could come，although I did not want him to discover anything about my horrible work．
　　Henry and I reached London in early October and stayed there for a few months．I met and talked with English scientists，and learnt many useful things from them．Then Henry was invited to visit some friends in Scotland．I planned to travel with him，but I told him that I wanted to go walking in the mountains alone． Henry was not happy with my plan， but in the end he agreed．
　　I bought all that I needed for a laboratory， and sent every-thing to Scotland．Henry and I travelled to Edinburgh together，and then I went further north，to find a good place for my laboratory．At last I found the right place on an island off the north coast．It was a wild and lonely place．Only five people lived on the island， so I could work alone， and nobody would discover my awful secret．
　　There was a large， empty hut on the island，and I brought builders from Scotland to make the hut into a laboratory for me．I showed them how to build my mast，and soon everything was ready for me to start work on the woman monster．






■ 10



■ 11
　　One evening two months later I was sitting in my lab-oratory．Most of my work was done，and I could finish the woman monster that night．But I wondered if I should finish the work．
　　Was I making a monster more evil than the first creature？Perhaps a thousand times more evil．How could I know？ Perhaps the woman monster would be another murderer．She had not promised to stay away from other people．Perhaps the two monsters would hate each other…and would kill，and murder， and destroy… without end．
　　As I thought these things，I looked up at the window． Suddenly，in the moonlight，I saw the monster's awful face looking at me．And in his yellow eyes I could see only hate and evil．I knew he would not keep his promise．
　　I went over to the laboratory table where the new creature was lying．I pulled off the wires that joined her to my machine．I took a sharp knife and cut through the body that I had joined together so carefully．Through the window the monster saw me destroy his woman．With a loud and miserable scream of sadness and lost hope，he ran into the laboratory．
　　‘You have destroyed all my hopes of happiness，’he cried．‘You have left me with one feeling—hate…and with one wish—to destroy your happiness．You will be sorry that you were ever born．Remember this：I shall be with you on your wedding night．’
　　He ran quickly out of the laboratory，and I watched him as he left the island in his boat and sailed away across the sea．
　　I sat and cried as I thought of the danger to Elizabeth．But I knew that the monster would not visit us until our wedding night．I would not die easily，and I would try to kill him before he could kill me．
　　The next morning I received a letter from Henry．He told me that he was waiting for me to return．I decided to clear the laboratory and to leave the island on the following day．So I re-turned to the laboratory，where the pieces of the woman monster's body still lay on the floor．I put them all in a large bag with some heavy stones．Then I took the bag to my boat and sailed out to sea．I threw the bag into deep water，and watched it disappear．
　　I was happier than I had felt for months．I knew I had done the right thing，and now there would be no second monster to follow the first．
　　I was very tired，and I went to sleep in the boat．I do not know how long I slept，but when I woke up，I was in the middle of a storm． The wind was driving me further out to sea and my boat began to fill with water．I knew I was in great danger．After some hours the storm passed，and I saw land to the south．Soon I could see the beach…and a crowd of people standing and watching me．Their faces were cold and unfriendly．
　　As I landed，four of the men came towards me and took me by the arms．
　　‘We are taking you to Mr Kerwin，the judge．He wants to ask you some questions about the murder of a man here last night，’one of the men told me．
　　I was sad to hear of the murder，but I did not worry about it．I had been far away at the time，and knew nothing about any murder．It would be easy to explain that．So I went with the men to the large house where Judge Kerwin lived．



■ 11



■ 12
　　The judge was an old， kind man， but his face was very serious as he looked at me． He asked a number of men to tell me what they had seen and found the night before．
　　The first man told his story．He and his son were coming home from a long day's fishing．It was a dark night，and on the beach they had fallen over the dead body of a man．They had carried the body to the nearest house，and found that it was a good-looking young man about twenty－five years old．There were the marks of fingers round his neck．When they spoke of the marks of fingers，I remembered the murder of my brother and I felt a terrible fear．
　　The son then told his story．He had seen a boat with a man in it， not far from the beach． He thought it was my boat．A woman had also seen a man in a boat sailing away from the beach．She thought I was the man．
　　Then I was taken to the room where the dead body lay．How can I tell you what I felt when I saw the body？I put my arms round it and cried：‘What have I done？ My friend！My dear friend！’The body was Henry Clerval's，and so now I had destroyed another person．
　　This third death was too much for me．I fell down in a kind of madness，and they had to carry me from the room． For two months I was very ill and wished only to die．But slowly my madness left me，and my health began to return．At last I was able to speak to Judge Kerwin，and I asked for news of my family．
　　‘There is someone here who can answer your question better than I can，’he said．‘Your father arrived a few minutes ago，and is waiting to see you．’
　　For the first time since Henry's death I felt some happiness．I held out my hands to my father as he came into the room， and he took me in his arms． He gave me the good news that Elizabeth and Ernest were safe and well．
　　I was really too ill to travel，but I asked my father to take me home immediately．The police had found somebody who had seen me on my island at the time of the murder，and so the judge let me go free．
　　My father looked after me on the long journey home，and sat with me for every minute．Night after night while I was asleep，I shouted that I was the murderer of William，Justine，and Henry．My father asked me why I said these awful things．I wanted to answer his question，but I could not tell him my terrible secret．He thought that I was still a little mad．
　　We stayed for a few days in Paris on the way home， and Elizabeth wrote to me at our hotel．This is what her letter said：
　　My dearest Victor，
　　I am so happy to know that you will soon be home．But I am afraid that Henry's death is not the only reason for your sadness．Do you still want to marry me， or do you love an-other woman？ You must tell me．
　　I love you，Victor，and I dream of the day when I shall be your wife．But I do not want you to marry me just because your parents wanted it．I can only be happy if you are happy．
　　Do not answer this letter．Wait until you arrive before you give me your answer．But if you are well，and if I can make you smile，I need nothing more to make me happy．
　　With all my love，
　　Elizabeth
　　I replied immediately．I told her that I loved her very much and wanted to marry her．
　　I remembered the monster's promise to be with me on the night of my wedding．Let him come．We would fight to the death on that night． And after that fight，I would either be dead and at peace，or alive and free… free to be happy with Elizabeth．
　　We arrived in Geneva soon after my letter had reached Elizabeth．It was wonderful to see her again．She ran into my arms and I held her close．She cried when she saw how thin and old I looked．She， too， was thinner because she had worried about me so much．But her gentleness and her love made her as beautiful as ever．
　　We agreed that the wedding would be in ten days'time．As the day came nearer，I became more and more afraid．I tried to hide my fear，and laughed and smiled as often as I could．Elizabeth knew that I was unhappy， but she was sure she could give me happiness．She looked forward to our wedding．
　　I began to carry a gun and a knife with me everywhere I went．



■ 12



■ 13
　　After the wedding a large number of our friends came to a party at our house． When the party had started，Elizabeth and I said goodbye and left for our honeymoon．We travelled first by boat， and planned to spend the night at a hotel on the other side of the lake． The mountains and the lake were calm and beautiful，and at last Elizabeth and I were together．For the first time for months， and for the last time ever，I enjoyed the feeling of happiness．
　　In the evening the wind became stronger and soon a great storm broke above us．Every noise frightened me，and I kept my hand on my gun under my coat．I saw the monster in every shadow．Suddenly I realized how terrible the fight would be for Elizabeth．I asked her to go to bed and I decided to search for the monster．I planned to join her when I was sure he was not in or around the hotel．
　　Elizabeth left me and I searched every corner of the hotel—every dark doorway and staircase．I could not find him，and I began to hope that he had not followed us to the hotel．But suddenly，I heard a loud and terrible scream．
　　It came from our room．
　　Then—too late—I understood．The monster had promised to be with me on my wedding night，but he had not planned to kill me．
　　The scream came again，and I ran to our room．Why did I 72not die there and then？
　　On the bed， Elizabeth lay still， in the cold sleep of death． I took her in my arms… and saw the marks of the murderer's fingers on her neck．
　　Other people in the hotel had heard the screams and came into our room． I sent one of them to call the police．The others left me alone with my misery．I held Elizabeth close， and as I held her， I saw the monster watching me through the open window of the room．There was an evil laugh on his face．I pulled my gun from my coat and fired at him． I missed， and he ran from the window and jumped into the lake．The other people heard the noise of the shot and came back into the room． I showed them the place where the monster had jumped into the lake．We searched the edge of the lake，but we could not find him．I returned to our room and lay on the bed next to my dear wife．
　　Suddenly I had another terrible thought．At this very moment perhaps my father was fighting the monster， with Ernest dead at his feet． I left the hotel and returned to Geneva as fast as I could．My father and Ernest were safe，but the awful news of Elizabeth's death killed my father．He had loved Elizabeth dearly． He be－came ill，and after a few days he died in my arms．So the evil monster had brought unhappiness and death to a dear old man who had never hurt anybody．
　　I do not know what happened next．I think I left the real world， and entered a dangerous world of dreams and madness．Later I found that they had put me in prison because of my madness．
　　After many months they let me free．I had only one wish—to find and kill the monster．



■ 13



■ 14
　　I decided to leave Geneva for ever．I took all the money that I needed，and left the town．Before I left，I went to visit the place where William，Elizabeth，and my father lay at rest．I stood there and promised them that I would stay alive until I had killed the monster．
　　A loud，evil laugh rang out through the silent night．Then I heard the monsters's voice：‘It pleases me that you have decided to live， because that is just what I want．’
　　I ran towards the voice，but I could not catch the monster．I saw him running away， but he ran faster than any man could go—too fast for me to catch． But I followed him，and I have been following him since that day．I shall stay alive until I can catch him．He wants me to live as long as possible．He wants me to feel，day after day，the pain and misery that he has given me．He leaves messages to tell me where he is．He knows that I shall follow him．
　　I am only happy when I am asleep．I dream that I am with my family， and Elizabeth and Henry．When I am awake，I look forward to my death， to the day when I shall be with them．
　　In his last message the monster told me that he was going north．He wanted to take me where the cold would hurt me and make me more miserable．I followed him to the cold lands of the north，and bought dogs and a sledge．Until now， he has always left me further and further behind when I chase him．But the dogs were very fast and I was getting closer and closer to him．Soon he was only one day's journey in front of me．He was going towards the sea， and I hoped to catch him before he reached it．The chase over the ice continued for about three weeks．The pain from the cold was very great，and I began to lose hope．I thought I would never catch him．My dogs could not run much further， and one of them died．Then I saw some-thing on the ice in front of me．It was the monster and his sledge．Suddenly I was full of hope again，and I gave a great shout of happiness．
　　I got closer and closer to him．Then a great storm started．The ice began to break，and the sea carried him away from me．My sledge was broken，and I lost my dogs．I was left on a piece of ice that was becoming smaller all the time．Many hours went by，and then I saw your ship．The rest you know． I ask you，Captain Walton，to chase the monster and kill him．Do not listen to what he says．He knows how to argue，and perhaps you will feel sorry for him．But remember that he is evil．Remember the deaths of William，Justine，Henry Clerval，Elizabeth，my father…and remember me， Victor Frankenstein．
　　There is no more for me to say，except to thank you，Captain Walton，for your help and kindness．Thank you also for listening to my story．I want you to tell the world that the monster is a danger to everyone．
　　I know that I have only a few hours left to live，but I can feel my loved ones near me， and I welcome death．
　　Goodbye．This is the end of Victor Frankenstein's story．



■ 14



■ Captain Walton's Note



■ 15
　　I，Captain Robert Walton，have added this final note to the story．When you have read it， you will know that Victor Frankenstein's story was true．
　　Victor Frankenstein died a few hours after he had written his last word．I was sad to see him die， because he had become a good friend．But he will not be unhappy or in pain any more，and I am happy for him
　　We laid his body in a cabin near my own．Later I heard a voice coming from the cabin．I went into the cabin and saw a huge shape standins over the dead body．I knew that the horrible creature which was standing there was Frankenstein's monster．
　　‘So I have killed you，too，’the monster said to Frankenstein's body．‘Oh， Frankenstein，forgive me．How I wish you could answer me．’
　　I went towards him，and said：‘It is too late for Frankenstein to forgive you．He is dead．His pain is ended．’
　　‘You do not know how much pain and unhappiness I have felt，’said the monster．‘I knew that I was doing evil things，but I could not stop myself．Do you think I enjoyed killing people？My heart was made for love，like a man's heart．After I killed Henry Clerval，I hated myself．But I could not stop myself from more murder．Frankenstein would not give me a wife， but he hoped to find happiness with a wife of his own．He was not fair to me．But now it is ended．Frankenstein is the last person I shall kill．
　　‘I have done all those evil things，but am I the only person who has done wrong？I wanted love and friendship．Think about Felix and his family，who hated me after I had given them love．Think about the man who shot me after I had saved his little girl from the river．But I know that I have done evil，and I hate myself more than you hate me．My own death is near．I shall leave this ship and go north，across the ice．I shall build a great fire，and lie down on it to die．I shall welcome the pain of the fire，because it will help me to forget the pain in my heart．I have felt more pain than Frankenstein．And when the fire has died down，I shall be at peace．’
　　The monster jumped from the cabin window as he said this．He got into the small boat in which he had reached the ship．The sea soon carried him away， and he was lost in the darkness．






■ 15

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Call of the Wild by Jack London





■ 1 To the north
　　Buck did not read the newspapers． He did not know that trouble was coming for every big dog in California． Men had found gold in the Yukon， and these men wanted big， strong dogs to work in the cold and snow of the north．
　　Buck lived in Mr Miller's big house in the sunny Santa Clara valley There were large gardens and fields of fruit trees around the house， and a river nearby． In a big place like this，of course， there were many dogs There were house dogs and farm dogs， but they were not important．Buck was chief dog；he was born here， and this was his place ．He was four years old and weighed sixty kilos ．He went swimming with Mr Miller's sons，and walking with his daughters ．He carried the grandchildren on his back， and he sat at Mr Miller's feet in front of the fire in winter．
　　But this was 1897， and Buck did not know that men and dogs were hurrying to north-west Canada to look for gold．And he did not know that Manuel， one of Mr Miller's garden－ers， needed money for his large family． One day，when Mr Miller was out， Manuel and Buck left the garden together．It was just an evening walk， Buck thought．No one saw them go， and only one man saw them arrive at the railway station．This man talked to Manuel， and gave him some money ．Then he tied a piece of rope around Buck's neck．
　　Buck growled， and was surprised when the rope was pulled hard around his neck．He jumped at the man．The man caught him and suddenly Buck was on his back with his tongue out of his mouth． For a few moments he was unable to move， and it was easy for the two men to put him into the train．
　　When Buck woke up， the train was still moving． The man was sitting and watching him， but Buck was too quick for him and he bit the man's hand hard．Then the rope was pulled again and Buck had to let go．
　　That evening， the man took Buck to the back room of a bar in San Francisco． The barman looked at the man's hand and trousers covered in blood．
　　‘How much are they paying you for this？’he asked．
　　‘I only get fifty dollars．’
　　‘And the man who stole him—how much did he get？’ asked the barman．
　　‘A hundred． He wouldn't take less．’
　　‘That makes a hundred and fifty． It's a good price for a dog like him ．Here， help me to get him into this．’
　　They took off Buck's rope and pushed him into a wooden box． He spent the night in the box in the back room of the bar． His neck still ached with pain from the rope， and he could not understand what it all meant ． What did they want with him， these strange men？ And where was Mr Miller？
　　The next day Buck was carried in the box to the railway station and put on a train
　　to the north．
　　For two days and nights the train travelled north， and for two days and nights Buck neither ate nor drank． Men on the train laughed at him and pushed sticks at him through the holes in the box． For two days and nights Buck got angrier and hungrier and thirsti-er． His eyes grew red and he bit anything that moved．
　　In Seattle four men took Buck to a small， high－walled back garden， where a fat man in an old red coat was waiting． Buck was now very angry indeed and hejumped and bit at the sides of his box． The fat man smiled and went to get an axe and a club．
　　‘Are you going to take him out now？’ asked one of the men． ‘Of course，’ answered the fat man， and he began to break the box with his axe．
　　Immediately the four other men climbed up onto the wall to watch from a safe place．
　　As the fat man hit the box with his axe， Buck jumped at the sides， growling and biting， pulling with his teeth at the pieces of broken wood． After a few minutes there was a hole big enough for Buck to get out． ‘ Now， come here， red eyes，’ said the fat man， dropping his axe and taking the club in his right hand．
　　Buck jumped at the man， sixty kilos of anger， his mouth wide open ready to bite the man's neck． Just before his teeth touched the skin， the man hit him with the club． Buck fell to the ground． It was the first time anyone had hit him with a club and he did not understand． He stood up， and jumped again． Again the club hit him and he crashed to the ground．Ten times he jumped at the man， and ten times the club hit him． Slowly he got to his feet， now only just able to stand．There was blood on his nose and mouth and ears． Then the fat man walked up and hit him again， very hard， on the nose．The pain was terrible． Again， Buck jumped at the man and again he was hit to the ground．A last time he jumped， and this time， when the man knocked him down， Buck did not move．
　　‘He knows how to teach a dog a lesson，’ said one of the men on the wall． Then the four men jumped down and went back to the station．
　　‘His name is Buck，’said the fat man to himself， reading the letter that had come with the box．‘Well， Buck， my by，’he said in a friendly voice，‘we've argued a little， and I think the best thing to do now is to stop． Be a good dog and we'll be friends． But if you're a bad dog， I'll have to use my club again．Understand？’
　　As he spoke， he touched Buck’ s head， and although Buck was angry inside， he did not move． When the man brought him water and meat， Buck drank and then ate the meat， piece by piece， from the man's hand．
　　Buck was beaten（he knew that） but he was not broken． He had learnt that a man with a club was stronger than him．Every day he saw more dogs arrive， and each dog was beaten by the fat man． Buck understood that a man with a club must be obeyed， although he did not have to be a friend．
　　Men came to see the fat man and to look at the dogs． Some-times they paid money and left with one or more of the dogs．One day a short， dark man came and looked at Buck．
　　‘That's a good dog！’ he cried．‘How much do you want for him？’
　　‘Three hundred dollars． It's a good price， Perrault，’said the fat man．
　　Perrault smiled and agreed that it was a good price． He knew dogs， and he knew that Buck was an excellent dog．
　　‘One in ten thousand，’ Perrault said to himself．
　　Buck saw money put into the fat man’ s hand， and he was not surprised when he and another dog called Curly were taken away by Perrault． He took them to a ship， and later that day Buck and Curly stood and watched the coast get further and further away．They had seen the warm south for the last time．
　　Perrault took Buck and Curly down to the bottom of the ship． There they met another man， Francois． Perrault was a French－Canadian， but Francois was half－Indian，tall and dark．Buck learnt quickly that Perrault and Francois were fair men，calm and honest． And they knew everything about dogs．
　　There were two other dogs on the ship．One was a big dog called Spitz， as white as snow． He was friendly to Buck at first， always smiling． He was smiling when he tried to steal Buck’ s food at the first meal． Francois was quick and hit Spitz before Buck had time to move． Buck decided that this was fair， and began to like Francois a little．
　　Dave， the other dog， was not friendly． He wanted to be alone all the time． He ate and slept and was interested in nothing．
　　One day was very like another， but Buck noticed that the weather was getting colder． One morning， the ship's engines stopped， and there was a feeling of excitement in the ship．Francois leashed the dogs and took them outside． At the first step Buck's feet went into something soft and white． He jumped back in surprise． The soft， white thing was also falling through the air， and it fell onto him． He tried to smell it， and then caught some on his tongue． It bit like fire， and then dis appeared． He tried again and the same thing happened． People were watching him and laughing， and Buck felt ashamed，although he did not know why． It was his first snow．






■ 2 The law of club and tooth
　　Buck's first day at Dyea Beach was terrible． Every hour there was some new， frightening surprise． There was no peace， no rest—only continual noise and movement． And every minute there was danger， because these dogs and men were not town dogs and men． They knew only the law of club and tooth．
　　Buck had never seen dogs fight like these dogs； they were like wolves． In a few minutes he learnt this from watching Curly． She tried to make friends with a dog， a big one， al－though not as big as she was． There was no warning． The dog jumped on Curly， his teeth closed together， then he jumped away，and Curly's face was torn open from eye to mouth．
　　Wolves fight like this，biting and jumping away，but the fight did not finish then． Thirty or forty more dogs ran up and made a circle around the fight， watching silently． Curly tried to attack the dog who had bitten her； he bit her a second time， and jumped away． When she attacked him again， he knocked her backwards， and she fell on the ground． She never stood up again， because this was what the other dogs were waiting for． They moved in， and in a moment she was under a crowd of dogs．
　　It was all very sudden． Buck saw Spitz run out from the crowd with his tongue out of his mouth， laughing． Then he saw Francois with an axe， and two or three other men with clubs jump in among the dogs． Two minutes later the last of the dogs was chased away． But Curly lay dead in the snow，her body torn almost to pieces．Curly's death often came backto Buck in his dreams． He understood that once a dog was down on the ground， he was dead He also remembered Spitz laughing， and from that moment he hated him．
　　Then Buck had another surprise． Francois put a harness on him． Buck had seen harnesses on horses， and now he was made to work like a horse， pulling Francois on a sledge into the forest and returning with wood for the fire． Buck worked with Spitz and Dave．The two other dogs had worked in a har－ness before， and Buck learnt by watching them． He also learnt to stop and turn when Francois shouted．
　　‘Those three are very good dogs，’Francois told Perrault．‘That Buck pulls very well， and he's learning quickly．’
　　Perrault had important letters and official papers to take to Dawson City， so that afternoon he bought two more dogs， two brothers called Billee and Joe．Billee was very friendly， but Joe was the opposite． In the evening Perrault bought one more dog， an old dog with one eye ．His name was Sol-leks， which means The Angry One． Like Dave， he made no friends； all he wanted was to be alone．
　　That night Buck discovered another problem． Where was he going to sleep？Francois and Perrault were in their tent， but when he went in， they shouted angrily and threw things at him．Outside it was very cold and windy． He lay down in the snow， but he was too cold to sleep．
　　He walked around the tents trying to find the other dogs．But， to his surprise， they had disappeared． He walked around Perrault's tent，very， very cold， wondering what to do． Sud-denly， the snow under his feet fell in， and he felt something move． He jumped back， waiting for the attack， but heard on-ly a friendly bark． There， in a warm hole under the snow，was Billee．
　　So that was what you had to do． Buck chose a place， dug himself a hole and in a minute he was warm and asleep． He slept well， although his dreams were bad．
　　When he woke up， at first he did not know where he was．It had snowed in the night and the snow now lay thick and heavy above him． Suddenly he was afraid—the fear of a wild animal when it is caught and cannot escape． Growling， he threw himself at the snow， and a moment later， he had jumped upwards into the daylight． He saw the tents and re－membered everything， from the time he had gone for a walk with Manuel to the moment he had dug the hole the night before． ‘What did I say？’ shouted Francois to Perrault， when he saw Buck come up out of the snow．‘That Buck learns quickly．’
　　Perrault smiled slowly． He was carrying important papers，and he needed good dogs． He was very pleased to have Buck．
　　They bought three more dogs that morning， and a quarter of an hour later all nine dogs were in harness and on their way up the Dyea Canyon． Buck was not sorry to be moving， and although it was hard work， he almost enjoyed it． He was also surprised to see that Dave and Sol－leks no longer looked bored and miserable．Pulling in a harness was their job， and they were happy to do it．
　　Dave was sledge－dog， the dog nearest to the sledge．In front of him was Buck， then came Sol-leks． In front of them were the six other dogs， with Spitz as leader at the front． Francois had put Buck between Dave and Sol－leks because they could teach him the work．Buck learnt well，and they were good teachers． When Buck pulled the wrong way， Dave always bit his leg， but only lightly． Once， when they stopped， Buck got tied up in his harness， and it took ten minutes to get started again．Both Dave and Sol－leks gave him a good beating for that mistake． Buck understood， and was more careful after that．
　　It was a hard day's journey， up the Dyea Canyon and into the mountains． They camped that night at Lake Bennett．Here there were thousands of gold miners．They were building boats to sail up the lake when the ice melted in the spring．Buck made his hole in the snow and slept well， but was woken up very early and harnessed to the sledge． The first day they had travelled on snow that had been hardened by many sledges and they covered sixty kilometres． But the next day， and for days afterwards， they were on new snow． The work was harder and they went slowly． Usually， Perrault went in front，on snowshoes， flattening the snow a little for the dogs．Francois stayed by the sledge． Sometimes the two men changed places， but there were many small lakes and rivers，and Perrault understood ice better． He always knew when the ice across a river was very thin．
　　Day after day Buck pulled in his harness．They started in the morning before it was light， and they stopped in the evening after dark， ate a piece of fish， and went to sleep in their holes under the snow． Buck was always hungry． Francoisgave him 750 grams of dried fish a day， and it was never enough． The other dogs were given only 500 grams； they were smaller and could stay dive on less food．
　　Buck learnt to eat quickly； if he was too slow， the other dogs stole his food． He saw Pike， one of the new dogs， steal some meat from the sledge when Perrault wasn't looking．The next day Buck stole some and got away unseen． Perrault was very angry， but he thought another dog， Dub， had taken it and so punished him instead of Buck．
　　Buck was learning how to live in the north． In the south he had never stolen， but there he had never been so hungry． He stole cleverly and secretly， remembering the beatings from the man with the club．
　　Buck was learning the law of club and tooth．
　　He learnt to eat any food—anything that he could get his teeth into． He learnt to break the ice on water holes with his feet when he wanted to drink He was stronger， harder， and could see and smell better than ever before ．In a way，he was remembering back to the days when wild dogs travelled in packs through the forest， killing for meat as they went．It was easy for him to learn to fight like a wolf， because it was in his blood． In the evenings， when he pointed his nose at the moon and howled long and loud， he was remembering the dogs and wolves that had come before him．






■ 3 The wild animal
　　The wild animal was strong in Buck， and as he travelled across the snow， it grew stronger and stronger． And as Buck grew stronger， he hated Spitz more and more， although he was careful never to start a fight．
　　But Spitz was always showing his teeth to Buck， trying to start a fight． And Buck knew that if he and Spitz fought， one of them would die．
　　The fight almost happened one night when they stopped by Lake Laberge．There was heavy snow and it was very cold．The lake was frozen and Francois， Perrault， and the dogs had to spend the night on the ice， under a big rock． Buck had made a warm hole in the snow and was sorry to leave it to get his piece of fish． But when he had eaten． and returned to his hole， he found Spitz in it． Buck had tried not to fight Spitz be－fore， but this was too much． He attacked him angrily． Spitz was surprised． He knew Buck was big， but he didn’ t know he was so wild． Francois was surprised too， and guessed why Buck was angry． ‘Go on Buck！’ he shouted．‘Fight him， the dirty thief！’
　　Spitz was also ready to fight， and the two dogs circled one another， looking for the chance to jump in． But suddenly there was a shout from Perrault， and they saw eighty or a hundred dogs around the sledge． The dogs came from an Indian village，and they were searching for the food that they could smell on the sledge． Perrault and Francois tried to fight them off with their clubs， but the dogs， made crazy by the smell of the food，showed their teeth and fought back．
　　Buck had never seed dogs like these． They were all skin and bone， but hunger made them fight like wild things．Three of them attacked Buck and in seconds his head and legs were bad－ly bitten．Dave and Sol-leks stood side by side，covered in blood，fighting bravely． Joe and Pike jumped on one dog，and Pike broke its neck with one bite．Buck caught another dog by the neck and tasted blood． He threw himself on the next one，and then felt teeth in his own neck．It was Spitz，attacking him from the side．
　　Perrault and Francois came to help with clubs， but then they had to run back to save the food ． It was safer for the nine sledge－dogs to run away across the lake． Several of them were badly hurt， and they spent an unhappy night hiding among the tress．
　　At first light they returned to the sledge and found Perrault and Francois tired and angry．Half their food was gone．The Indian dogs had even eaten one of Perrault's shoes．Francois looked at his dogs unhappily．
　　‘Ah， my friends，’he said softly，‘Perhaps those bites will make you ill．What do you think， Perrault？’
　　Perrault said nothing． They still had six hundred kilometres to travel， and he hoped very much that his sledge－dogs had not caught rabies from the Indian dogs．
　　The harness was torn and damaged and it was two hours be－fore they were moving， travelling slowly and painfully over the most difficult country that they had been in．
　　The Thirty Mile River was not frozen． It ran too fast to freeze． They spent six days trying to find a place to cross， and every step was dangerous for dogs and men． Twelve times they found ice bridges across the river， and Perrault walked carefully onto them， holding a long piece of wood． And twelve times he fell through a bridge and was saved by the piece of wood， which caught on the sides of the hole．But the tempera-ture was 45° below zero， and each time Perrault fell into the water， he had to light a fire to dry and warm himself． Once，the sledge fell through the ice， with Dave and Buck， and they were covered in ice by the time Perrault and Francois pulled them out of the river．Again， a fire was needed to save them．Another time， Spitz and the dogs in front fell through the ice—Buck and Dave and Francois at the sledge had to pull backwards．That day they travelled only four hundred metres．
　　When they got to the Hootalinqua and good ice， Buck and the other dogs were very， very tired． But they were late， so Perrault made them run faster． In three days they went a hun－dred and eighty kilometres and reached the Five Fingers．
　　The other dogs had hard feet from years of pulling sledges，but Buck's feet were still soft from his easy life down south．All day he ran painfully， and when they camped for the night，he lay down like a dead dog．He was hungry，but he was too tired to walk to the fish， so Francois brought it to him．One day Francois made four little shoes for him， and this made Buck much more comfortable． Francois forgot the shoes one morning， and Buck refused to move． He lay on his back with his feet in the air， until Francois put the shoes on． Later his feet grew harder and the shoes were not needed．
　　One morning， at the Pelly River， a dog called Delly went suddenly mad． She howled long and loud like a wolf and then jumped at Buck． Buck ran， with Dolly one step behind him．She could not catch him， but he could not escape from her．They ran half a kilometre， and then Buck heard Francois call to him． He turned and ran towards the man， sure that Francois would save him． Francois stood ，holding his axe，and as Buck passed， the axe crashed down on Dolly's head．
　　Buck fell down by the sledge， too tired to move． Immedi-ately， Spitz attacked him and bit his helpless enemy twice， as hard as he could． But Francois saw this， and gave Spitz a ter－rible beating for it．
　　‘He's a wild dog， that Spitz，’said Perrault．‘One day he'll kill Buck．’
　　‘Buck is wilder，’replied Francois．‘I've been watching him． One day he'll get very angry and he'll fight Spitz； and he'll win．’ Francois was right． Buck wanted to be lead-dog．Spitz knew this and hated him． Buck started to help the other dogs when Spitz punished them for being lazy．One morning， Pike refused to get up， and Spitz looked for him everywhere． When he found him， he jumped at him．But suddenly， Buck at－tacked Spitz． The other dogs saw this， and it became more and more difficult for Spitz to lead them．But the days passed without a chance for a fight， and soon they were pulling into Dawson City on a cold grey afternoon．
　　They stayed in Dawson for seven days． When they left，Perrault was carrying some more very important papers， and he wanted to travel back as fast as possible．
　　They travelled eighty kilometres the first day， and the same the second． But it was difficult work for Francois． Buck and Spitz hated each other， and the other dogs were not afraid of Spitz any more． One night Pike stole half a fish from Spitz，and ate it standing next to Buck． And every time Buck went near Spitz， he growled and the hair on his back stood up angri-ly． The other dogs fought in their harnesses and Francois often had to stop the sledge．He knew that Buck was the problem，but Buck was too clever for him and Francois never saw him actually starting a fight．
　　One night in camp， the dogs saw a snow rabbit and in a sec-ond they were all chasing it， with Spitz in front． Nearby was another camp， with fifty dogs， who also Joined the chase． The rabbit was running fast on top of the snow， but the snow was soft， and it was more difficult for the dogs． When Spitz caught the rabbit， throwing it in the air with his teeth， Buck was just behind． Spitz stopped， and Buck hit him， very hard． The two dogs fell in the snow． Spitz bit Buck very quickly， twice， and then jumped away， watching carefully．
　　The time had come， and Buck knew that either he or Spitz must die． They watched one another， circling slowly． Themoon was shining brightly on the snow， and in the cold still air not a leaf moved on the trees． The other dogs finished eating the rabbit and then turned to watch．
　　Spitz was a good fighter． He was full of hate and anger， but he was also intelligent． Every time Buck tried to bite his throat， he met Spitz's own teeth． Then， each time Buck attacked， Spitz moved and bit him on the side as he passed．After a few minutes，Buck was covered in blood．
　　He attacked again， but this time turned at the last minute and went under Spitz， biting his left front leg． The bone broke， and Spitz was standing on three legs． Buck tried to knock Spitz down， and then repeated his earlier attack and broke Spitz's right front leg．
　　There was no hope for Spitz now． Buck got ready for his final attack， while the circle of sixty dogs watched， and crowded nearer and nearer， waiting for the end． At last Buck jumped， in and out， and Spitz went down in the snow． A second later the waiting pack was on top of him， and Spitz had disappeared． Buck stood and watched． The wild animal had made its kill．






■ 4 The new lead-dog
　　‘Well， what did I say？ Buck’ s a real fighter，all right，’ said Francois the next morning when he discovered that Spitz had disappeared and that Buck was covered in blood．
　　‘Spitz fought like a wolf，’said Perrault， as he looked at the bites all over Buck．
　　‘And Buck fought like ten wolves，’ answered Francois．‘And we'll travel faster now． No more Spitz， no more trouble．’
　　Francois started to harness the dogs． He needed a new lead－dog， and decided that Sol-leks was the best dog that he had．But Buck jumped at Sol－leks and took his place．
　　‘Look at Buck！’ said Francois， laughing．‘He's killed Spitz， and now he wants to be lead－dog． Go away， Buck！’
　　He pulled Buck away and tried to harness Sol－leks again．Sol-leks was unhappy too． He was frightened of Buck， and when Francois turned his back， Buck took Sol-leks’ place again． Now Francois was angry．
　　‘I'll show you！’ he cried， and went to get a heavy club from the sledge．
　　Buck remembered the man in the red coat， and moved away． This time， when Sol-leks was harnessed as lead-dog，Buck did not try to move in． He kept a few metres away and circled around Francois carefully． But when Francois called him to his old place in front of Dave， Buck refused． He had won his fight with Spitz and he wanted to be lead－dog．
　　For an hour the two men tried to harness him． Buck did not run away， but he did not let them catch him． Finally，Francois sat down， and Perrault looked at his watch．It was getting late．The two men looked at one another and smiled Francois walked up to Sol-leks， took off his harness， led him back and harnessed him in his old place．Then he called Buck．All the other dogs were harnessed and the only empty place was now the one at the front But Buck did not move．
　　‘Put down the club，’ said Perrault．
　　Francois dropped the club， and immediately Buck came up to the front of the team．Francois harnessed him ，and in a minute the sledge was moving．
　　Buck was an excellent leader． He moved and thought quick－ly and led the other dogs well． A new leader made no differ－ence to Dave and Sol-leks； they continued to pull hard ．But the other dogs had had an easy life when Spitz was leading．They were surprised when Buck made them work hard and punished them for their mistakes Pike， the second dog，was usually lazy； but by the end of the first day he was pulling harder than he had ever pulled in his life． The first night in camp Buck fought Joe， another difficult dog， and after that there were no more problems with him． The team started to pull together， and to move faster and faster．
　　‘I've never seen a dog like Buck！’cried Francois，‘Never！He's worth a thousand dollars ．What do you think，Perrault？’
　　Perrault agreed．They were moving quickly， and covering more ground every day The snow was good and hard， and no new snow fell．The temperature dropped to 45° below zero，and didn't change．
　　This time there was more ice on the Thirty Mile River， and they crossed in a day．Some days they ran a hundred kilome－tres， or even more They reached Skagway in fourteen days；the fastest time ever．
　　For three days the dogs rested in Skagway．Then Francois put his arms around Buck's neck and said goodbye to him．And that was the last of Francois and Perrault． Like other men， they passed out of Buck's life for ever．
　　Two new men took Buck and his team back north on the long journey to Dawson，travelling with several other dog－teams． It was heavy work； the sledge was loaded with letters for the gold miners of Dawson． Buck did not like it， but he worked hard， and made the other dogs work hard， too． Each day was the same． They started early， before it was light， and at night they stopped and camped and the dogs ate．For the dogs this was the best part of the day， first eating， then resting by the fire．
　　Buck liked to lie by the fire， looking at the burning wood．Sometimes he thought about Mr Miller's house in California．More of ten he remembered the man in the red coat and his club， the death of Curly， the fight with Spitz， and the good things that he had eaten But sometimes he remembered other things These were things that he remembered through his parents， and his parents parents， and all the dogs which had lived before him．
　　Sometimes as he lay there， he seemed to see， in a waking dream， a different fire． And he saw next to him， not the Indian cook， but another man， a man with shorter legs， and longer arms． This man had long hair and deep eyes， and madestrange noises in his throat He was very frightened of the dark，and looked around him all the time， holding a heavy stone in his hand ．He wore the skin of an animal on his back，and Buck could see thick hair all over his body．
　　Buck sat by the fire with this hairy man， and in the circling darkness beyond the fire he could see many eyes—the eyes of hungry animals waiting to attack． And he growled softly in his dream until the Indian cook shouted，‘Hey， Buck， wake up！’Then the strange world disappeared and Buck's eyes saw the real fire again．
　　When they reached Dawson， the dogs were tired， and needed a week's rest But in two days they were moving south again， with another heavy load of letters． Both dogs and men were unhappy． It snowed every day as well， and on soft new snow it was harder work pulling the sledges．
　　The men took good care of their dogs．In the evenings， the dogs ate first，the men second，and they always checked the dogs’ feet before they slept． But every day the dogs became weaker．Buck had pulled sledges for three thousand kilometres that winter， and he was as tired as the others．
　　But Dave was not only tired； he was ill． Every evening he lay down the minute after the sledge stopped， and did not stand up until morning． The men looked at him， but they could find no broken bones． Something was wrong inside．
　　One day he started to fall down while in his harness． The sledge stopped， and the driver took him out of his harness． He wanted to give him a rest， and let him run free behind the sledge． But Dave did not want to stop working． He hated to see another dog doing his work， so he ran along beside the sledge， trying to push Sol-leks out of his place． When the sledge made its next stop，
　　Dave bit through Sol-leks’ harness and pushed him away． Then he stood there， in his old place in front of the sledge， waiting for his harness and the order to start pulling．
　　The driver decided it was kinder to let him work． Dave pulled all day， but the next morning he was too weak to move．The driver harnessed up without Dave， and drove a few hun-dred metres． Then he stopped， took his gun， and walked back． The dogs heard a shot， and then the man came quickly back． The sledge started to move again； but Buck knew， and every dog knew， what had happened．






■ 5 More hard work
　　Thirty days after leaving Dawson City， the team arrived back in Skagway． They were very， very tired Buck now weighed only fifty kilograms， and the other dogs were also very thin．
　　They were not ill； they just needed a long， long rest． But at Skagway there were mountains of letters waiting to go north，so the men had to buy new， strong dogs The old ones， now useless for work， were sold．
　　Two American men， called Hal and Charles， bought Buck and his team， together with the harness． Charles was forty years old， with light hair and watery blue eyes． Hal was a young man of twenty with a big shiny gun and a big knife in his belt ．These things， more than anything， showed how young he was Both men were clearly new to the north， and its hard and dangerous life．
　　They took the dogs back to their untidy camp， where a woman was waiting ．This was Mercedes—Charles's wife and Hal's sister．
　　Buck watched the men take down the tent and load all their luggage on the sledge． They didn't know how to do it sensibly， and every time they put something on the sledge，Mercedes moved it． Often they had to take things off the sledge and start again．
　　Three men came up and watched， laughing
　　‘You've got a heavy load on that sledge，’ said one of them ‘Why don't you leave the tent here in Skagway？’
　　‘How could we live without a tent？’ asked Mercedes，throwing up her hands in the air．
　　‘It's spring now．You won't have any more cold weather．’
　　‘I must have a tent，’she answered， and helped Charles and Hal with the last few boxes．
　　‘Do you think that load will stay on？’asked another man．
　　‘Why shouldn't it？’ asked Charles．
　　‘Well， it's a bit heavy on top． Do you think your dogs will be able to pull that？’
　　‘Of course they will，’said Hal． The sledge was now ready to go．‘ Come on，dogs， pull！’ he shouted ．
　　The dogs pulled as hard as they could， but the sledge did not move．
　　‘The lazy animals！’shouted Hal， picking up his whip．
　　But Mercedes stopped him ‘Oh， Hal， you mustn't，’ she cried， pulling the whip away from him ．‘The poor dogs．You must promise to be nice to them or I'm staying here！’
　　‘You know nothing about dogs，’ answered Hal．‘ Leave me alone Dogs are lazy， and you have to whip them． Everybody knows that． Ask those men if you don't believe me．’
　　Mercedes turned and looked at the watching men．
　　‘They’ re tired， if you really want to know，’ said one of them ‘They’ ve been working very hard and they need a rest．’
　　‘Rest？’laughed Hal．‘These stupid dogs are just lazy．’
　　Now Mercedes decided that her brother was right．‘Don't listen to that man，’she said ‘You're driving our dogs and you do what you think is best．’
　　Now Hal used his whip on the dogs. They pulled and pulled，but the sledge stayed where it was．Hal was still using his whip when Mercedes stopped him again and put her arms around Buck．
　　‘You poor，poor dears，’she said．‘Why don't you pull hard？—then nobody will whip you．’
　　One of the men watching now spoke again．‘I don't care what happens to you，’ he said，‘but I'm sorry for the dogs．The sledge is frozen to the snow，and you'll have to break it out． Push it from one side to the other to break the ice．’
　　Hal tried again，but this time he broke the ice under the sledge．The heavy sledge started to move slowly，Buck and his team pulling hard under the whip．After a hundred metres they had to turn into another street．It was a difficult turn with a top-heavy load，and Hal was not a good driver．As they turned，the sledge went over onto its side，throwing boxes and packets into the street．The dogs didn't stop． The sledge was not so heavy now and they pulled it easily on its side．The whip had made them angry and they started to run．Hal cried ‘Stop！’ but the dogs continued through Skagway，and the rest of the luggage fell off as they ran．
　　People helped to catch the dogs and to pick up all the things from the street． They also told the men that if they wanted to reach Dawson，they needed twice as many dogs and half as much luggage．Hal and Charles went back to the camp and started to look at the luggage and throw things away．Tent，blankets and plates were taken out．Mercedes cried when most of her clothes went．When they had finished，Mercedes was still crying，there was a lot of luggage on the road，and there was still a lot to go on the sledge．
　　Then Charles and Hal went out and bought six more dogs，so they now had fourteen． But the new dogs were not real sledge－dogs and they knew nothing about the work．Charles and Hal put them into harness， but Buck could not teach them how to pull a sledge．So now there were six dogs who couldn't pull at all， and eight who were tired after pulling for four thousand kilometres．But Charles and Hal were happy．They had more dogs than any sledge that they had seen at Skagway．They didn’ t know that no sledge could carry enough food for fourteen dogs．
　　The next morning Buck led the team up the street．They moved slowly， because they were tired before they started．Buck had pulled to Dawson and back twice，and he didn't want to do it again．He had watched Hal and Charles and Mercedes and he saw that they didn't know how to do any thing．And，as the days passed，he saw that they could not learn．It took them half the evening to get everything ready for the night；and it took them half the morning to get ready to leave． And when they did start， they often had to stop because something had fallen off the sledge．On some days they travelled twenty kilometres and on some days only ten．
　　They didn't have enough dog food when they started，and they used what they had much too quickly．Hal gave the dogs extra food because he wanted them to pull harder．Mercedes gave them extra food because she was sorry for them．But it was not food that they wanted，but rest．
　　Soon Hal saw that they had travelled only a quarter of the way to Dawson，but had eaten half their food．He had to give the dogs less food． It was easy to give them less food，but it was impossible to make them travel faster．
　　Dub had pulled hard and well all the way from Skagway，but he had hurt his leg．It got worse and worse until finally Hal had to shoot him．The six new dogs，now weak and ill from hunger and hard work，died next．
　　Hal，Charles，and Mercedes had started the journey happily；but now they were tired，cross and miserable．Charles and Hal argued about everything，because each thought that he was working harder than the other．And Mer cedes was unhappy because she thought that she shouldn't have to work．She was tired，so she rode on the sledge，mak ing the work even harder for the dogs．She rode for days，until the dogs could not move the sledge．The men asked her to walk，but she would not leave the sledge．One day they lifted her off．She sat in the snow and did not move．They went off with the sledge and travelled five kilometres．Then they turned，went back，and lifted her on again．
　　Buck and the other dogs were now just skin and bone．They pulled when they could，and when they couldn't they lay down in the snow．When they were whipped，they stood up and tried to pull again．
　　One day Billee fell and could not stand up．Hal killed him and threw him into the snow． Buck and the other dogs knew that soon they were going to die，too．On the next day Koona died，and there were only five dogs left：Joe，Pike，Sol－leks the one－eyed，Teek，and Buck．
　　It was beautiful spring weather．The snow and ice were melting，the plants were growing，and the forest animals were waking from their winter sleep．It was a lovely morning when the two men， and the five dogs pulling Mercedes on the sledge，came into John Thornton's camp at White River．They stopped，and the dogs dropped down immediately to rest．
　　John Thornton was mending an axe，and he went on working as he talked to Hal．
　　‘Is it safe to cross the river here？’asked Hal．
　　‘No，the ice is too thin．It's much too dangerous，answered Thornton．
　　‘People have told us that before，’laughed Hal，‘but we got here with no problems．’
　　‘Only somebody very stupid would cross the White River here，’said Thornton．
　　‘That's what you think，’said Hal．‘But we've got to get to Dawson．’He pickd up his whip．‘Come on，Buck！Get up now！Let's go！’
　　Thornton went on working．He had warned them，but he knew he couldn't stop these stupid men from going on．
　　But Buck didn't get up．Sol-leks stood up slowly，then Teek and Joe，and finally Pike．But Buck stayed where he was．The whip came down on him again and again．Thornton started to speak，then stopped，and began to walk up and down．
　　Hal now put down his whip and started to hit Buck with a club．But Buck had decided not to get up．He had felt thin ice under his feet all day and he saw thin ice in front of him．The club hit him again and again，but Buck felt almost nothing．
　　Then suddenly， with a wild cry，John Thornton jumped on Hal，throwing him backwards．Mercedes screamed．
　　‘If you hit that dog again，I’11 kill you，’Thornton shouted．
　　‘He's my dog，’Hal replied．There was blood on his face．‘Get out of my way，or I’11 hit you，too．I'm going to Dawson．’
　　Thornton stood between Hal and Buck and did not move．Hal took out his long knife，but Thornton knocked it out of his hand．Mercedes screamed again．Then Thornton picked up Hal's knife and cut Buck out of the harness．
　　Hal didn't want to fight，and Buck was not worth fighting for；he was nearly dead． Hal started the sledge and went down towards the river．Buck lifted his head and watched the sledge move away．Pike was leading，and Joe，Teek and Sol－leks were behind him．Hal was walking in front of the sledge and Mercedes was riding on it；Charles was walking behind．
　　As Buck watched，Thornton felt his body with gentle hands，searching for broken bones．Buck was very thin，very tired and very weak，but Thornton didn't think he was going to die．Then both dog and man watched the sledge as it went slowly out on to the ice in the middle of the river．Suddenly the back of the sledge went down and the front went up into the air． Mercedes screamed，and Charles turned and took one step back． Then a big piece of ice broke off，and dogs，sledge and people disappeared；there was only a big hole in the ice．
　　John Thornton and Buck looked at one another．
　　‘You poor thing，’said John Thornton，and Buck licked his hand．






■ 6 For the love of a man
　　John Thornton had been ill in December，and his two friends had had to leave him at White River and go on to Dawson．They left him in the camp with plenty of food ，and with his two dogs，Skeet and Blackie．Now the spring had come，and he was almost well．He lay in the sun by the river with Buck，watching the water and listening to the birds，slowly getting stronger and stronger．
　　A rest is very welcome after running five thousand kilome tres，and Buck slowly got fatter and stronger．It was a peace ful，lazy time for both man and dogs while they waited for Thornton's friends to return from Dawson．
　　Skeet made friends with Buck immediately，and while Buck was still very ill， every morning she washed his cuts carefully with her tongue．Blackie，too，was friendly，and as Buck grew stronger，the three dogs often played games together．Sometimes Thornton joined the games too．
　　The days passed very happily，and for the first time，Buck learned to love，He had never loved a man before．He and Mr Miller in the Santa Clara valley had been very good friends，but Buck had not loved him．John Thornton had saved his life，but he was also a man who was naturally kind to animals．He took very good care of his dogs，not because it was sensible to do that， but because he felt they were his children． He was always talking to Buck，holding his head and shaking it lovingly．In answer，Buck liked to take Thornton's hand gently in his mouth．
　　Buck was happy to lie on the ground all day and watch Thornton And when Thornton spoke to him or touched him，Buck went wild with happiness． At first， he was afraid that Thornton was going to disappear，like Perrault and Francois，and at night he sometimes woke up and went to the tent to make sure that he was still there．
　　But something was changing in Buck．He had lived in the north a long time now，and he was almost a wild dog．He was happy to sit by Thornton's fire，but he sat as a wild animal，and his dreams were filled with other animals—dogs， half wolves，and wild wolves．They seemed to call him into the forest，and sometimes Buck wanted to leave the fire and answer the call．But every time he went into the trees，his love for Thornton brought him back．
　　It was only Thornton who stopped him going into the forest．Other men did not interest him．Visitors to the camp tried to make friends with him，but Buck stayed cold．When Thornton's two friends，Hans and Pete，arrived from Dawson，Buck refused to notice them at first．Then he saw that they were friends of Thornton's and after that he accept ed them；but they were not his friends They were，like Thornton，kind men，and they understood that Buck loved Thornton，and him alone．
　　Thornton，too，understood Buck．One day，Buck and the three men were sitting on some high rocks， a hundred metres above the river．Thornton wondered if Buck would obey any order， even a crazy one．‘Jump，Buck！’he shouted，pointing down to the river．A second later the three men were holding Buck back as he tried to jump．
　　‘That was very strange，’said Pete， when they had sat down again．
　　‘Not strange；wonderful，’said Thornton．‘Terrible，too．Sometimes it frightens me．’
　　‘Yes．I feel sorry for any man who hits you when Buck's near，’said Pete．
　　‘So do I，’said Hans．
　　It happened in the autumn in Circle City．A man called Bur ton was starting a fight with another man in a bar．Thornton stepped between them to try to stop them．Buck was，as usual，lying in the corner watching．Burton hit Thornton and he nearly fell，just catching a table．Buck flew through the air at Burton's throat．Burton saved his life by putting up his arm，and was thrown on to the ground，with Buck on top of him．Buck took his teeth out of the man's arm and this time bit into his throat．Then a crowd of people pulled Buck off，and a doctor was called．Everyone agreed that Buck had only attacked because he saw Thornton in danger，and from that day Buck's name became famous all over the north．
　　Later that year，Buck saved Thornton in a different way．The three men were taking a boat down a fast and rocky river．Thornton was in the boat，while Hans and Pete moved along the river bank，holding the boat with a rope．Buck followed them，keeping a worried eye on Thornton．
　　They came to a more dangerous part of the river， and the boat started to go too quickly．Hans pulled on the rope to stop it，and pulled too hard．The boat turned over，and Thornton was thrown into the water and carried down river towards rocks where no swimmer could live．
　　Buck jumped in immediately and swam three hundred me tres until he reached Thornton．Then he turned，and with Thornton holding his tail，Buck swam towards the river bank．But they moved slowly，and all the time the river was carrying them towards the place where the water crashed twenty metres down onto rocks．Thornton knew that they would not get to the bank quickly enough，so he let go of Buck，held on to a rock in the middle of the water，and shouted，‘Go，Buck，go！’
　　Buck swam as hard as he could to the bank，and Pete and Hans pulled him out．
　　It was hard for Thornton to hold on to his rock in that wild water，and his friends knew they had only a few minutes to save him．They tied their rope round Buck，who at once jumped into the river and tried to swim to Thornton．The first time，the water took him past the rock，and Pete and Hans had to pull him back The second time，he swam higher up the river，and the water brought him down to Thornton．Thornton held on to Buck，and Hans and Pete pulled the rope as hard as they could．Man and dog disappeared under the water，banging into rocks，turning over and over，sometimes with Buck on top，sometimes Thornton．When Hans and Pete finally pulled them out，both seemed more dead than alive But after a while their eyes opened and life returned
　　That winter，at Dawson，Buck did something that made him even more famous in the north．It was also very helpful to the three men．They wanted to make a journey to look for gold in the east，and they needed money．They were in a bar one day when some of the men started to talk about dogs．One man said that he had a dog who was strong enough to pull a sledge with two hundred kilos on it．Another said his dog could pull two hundred and fifty．A third man，called Matthewson，said his dog could pull three hundred kilos．
　　‘That's nothing，’said Thornton．‘Buck can pull three hundred and fifty．’
　　‘ Can he break the sledge out when it's frozen to the ice and then start it moving？And pull it a hundred metres？’ asked Matthewson．
　　‘He can break it out，and start it，and pull it a hundred metres，said Thornton．
　　‘Well，’said Matthewson，speaking slowly and loudly．‘I've got a thousand dollars here，and I say he can't．’ As he spoke，he took a bag of gold and put it down on the table．
　　Suddenly Thornton was worried．He knew Buck was strong，but was he strong enough？ Now ten men were watching him and waiting．He didn't have a thousand dollars，and neither did Hans or Pete．
　　‘I've got a sledge outside with three hundrd and fifty kilos on it，’said Matthewson．‘So it's easy if you want to try．’
　　Thornton didn't know what to say．He looked at the other men in the bar．One of them was an old friend，Jim O’Brien．
　　‘Can yon lend me a thousand dollars，Jim？’he asked softly．
　　‘Sure，’said O’Brien，putting another bag of gold next to Matthewson's．‘But I don't think the dog can do it，John．’
　　Everybody went out into the street．There were two or three hundred men around Matthewson's sledge．The sledge had been outside the bar for two hours，and it was frozen to the ice，in a temperature of 50°below zero．Most of the men thought that Buck was not strong enough，and Matthewson smiled happily．
　　‘Shall we make it two thousand dollars？’he asked．
　　Thornton，Hans and Pete talked for a minute．They had only four hundred dollars，but they added this to O’Brien's thousand．Matthewson，very sure of winning．also put down another four hundred dollars．
　　Matthewson's ten dogs were taken away，and Buck，who could feel the excitement in the air，was harnessed to the sledge．Buck was，without question，a very fine animal—bright-eyed，intelligent，his thick coat shining with health．And he looked as strong as a horse．
　　One man went up to Thornton．‘I'll buy him now，’he said．‘I’11 give you eight hundred dollars for him．’
　　Thornton shook his head and sat down on the snow next to Buck．He held Buck's head in his hands and spoke softly into his ear．‘If you love me，Buck．If you love me．’
　　Buck took Thornton's hand between his teeth，then let go，and Thornton stood up and stepped back．
　　‘Ready，Buck，’he said．
　　Buck pulled on the harness a little， getting ready．
　　‘Right！’cried Thornton．
　　Buck pulled to the right，hard，stopped suddenly，and the ice under the sledge began to break．
　　‘Now，left！’called Thornton，and Buck pulled to the left，breaking more of the ice．
　　‘Now，pull！’
　　Buck threw himself against his harness，and pulled．He held his body low to the ground，his head down and forward，and his feet dug into the hard snow．Harder and harder he pulled．Suddenly，the sledge moved a centimetre…two…three…and，little by little，it started to go forward across the snow．With each second it went a little faster，and Thornton ran be hind，calling to Buck as he pulled the sledge towards the end of the hundred metres．The watching men were shouting and throwing their hats in the air；Buck had won．
　　Then Thornton was on the snow next to Buck again，talking to him，and Buck had Thornton's hand in his teeth．






■ 7 The call of the wild
　　In five minutes Buck had made fourteen hundred dollars for Thornton and his friends．The money made it possi ble for them to travel east，where they wanted to look for a lost gold mine．Men said that this mine had more gold than any other mine in the north． Many had looked for it，and some had died looking for it．The only men who knew where it was were now dead．
　　Thornton，Pete and Hans，with Buck and six other dogs，started off to the east in the spring．They travelled up the Stewart River and crossed the Mackenzie Mountains．They did not move quickly；the weather was good，and！the men shot animals for food when they needed it．Sometimes they travelled for a week，and sometimes they stopped for a week and searched for gold in the ground．Sometimes they were hungry，and sometimes they had lots of food．They spent all the summer in the mountains，carrying everything they needed on their backs，sometimes making boats to go down rivers or across lakes．
　　In the autumn they came to a strange，flat country，with many lakes．They travelled on through the winter and met nobody，but once they found an old wooden house，with an old gun in it．
　　When the spring came，they found，not the lost mine，but a lake in a wide valley．Through the shallow water the gold showed like yellow butter， and here their search ended．There was gold worth thousands of dollars in the lake，and they worked every day，filling bag after bag with gold．
　　The dogs had nothing to do except watch the men and eat the food which the men shot for them．Buck spent many evenings sitting by the fire．
　　As he sat，he saw again his dream world，where the strange hairy man sat next to him．He also heard something calling him into the forest．Sometimes，in the middle of the day，he lifted his head and listened，and then ran off into the forest．
　　One night he woke up and heard the call again，a long howl．He ran into the forest，following the sound，and came to an open place in the trees．And there， his nose pointing to the sky，sat a wolf．
　　The wolf stopped howling and Buck walked slowly towards him．The wolf ran， and Buck followed．After a time，the wolf stopped and waited，watching Buck，ready to attack．But Buck did not want to fight，and soon the wolf realized this，and the two animals became friendly．Then the wolf started to run again，and he clearly wanted Buck to follow him．They ran for hours through the forest，and Buck remembered again his dream world where he，and others like him，had run through a much older forest．
　　Then they stopped to drink，and Buck remembered John Thornton．He turned and started to run back．The wolf followed him，then stopped and howled， but Buck ran on and did not turn．
　　Thornton was eating dinner when Buck returned．Buck jumped all over him，and for two days never left his side．He followed him every where，watching him while he ate and while he slept．But after two days the call of the wild came again，and he remembered the forest and the wolf who had run beside him．
　　He started to sleep out in the forest at night，sometimes staying out for three or four days．Once he was away for a week，fishing and killing animals for food．He ate well，and he grew stronger and quicker and more alive．His golden brown coat shone with health as he ran through the forest，learning its every secret，every smell，and every sound．
　　‘He's the finest dog that I've ever seen，’said Thornton to his friends one day as they watched Buck walking out of camp．
　　‘There’11 never be another dog like him，’said Pete．
　　They saw him walking out of camp but they didn't see the change that happened when he was inside the forest．At once he became a thing of the wild，stepping softly and silently，a passing shadow among the trees．
　　In the autumn，Buck started to see moose in the forest．One day he met a group of about twenty．The largest was two me tres tall，and his antlers were more than two metres across．When he saw Buck， he got very angry． For hours Buck fol lowed the moose；he wanted the big one，but he wanted him alone．By the evening Buck had driven the big old moose away from the others，and then he began his attack．The animal weighed six hundred and fifty kilos—he was big enough and strong enough to kill Buck in seconds．Patiently，Buck fol lowed him for four days，attacking and then jumping away．He gave him no peace，no time to eat or drink or rest， and slowly the moose became weaker．At the end of the fourth day Buck pulled the moose down and killed him．He stayed by the dead animal for a day and a half，eating，and then turned towards camp and John Thornton．
　　Five kilometres from the camp，he smelt something strange．Something was wrong．He started to run．After a few hundred metres he found the dead body of Blackie，with an arrow through his side．Then he found another sledge－dog，dying，with an arrow in his neck．
　　Buck was near the camp now，and he could hear voices singing．Then he saw the body of Hans，lying on his face，with ten or fifteen arrows in his back．Buck was suddenly filled with a wild，burning anger．
　　The yeehats were dancing around the camp，when they heard a deep and terrible growling．Buck came out of the trees faster than the north wind，and threw himself on the Yeehats like a mad dog He jumped at the first man，and tore out his throat，killing him at once．He jumped onto a second，then a third man，going each time for the throat．The Yeehats could neither escape nor use their arrows．Buck moved like a storm among them，tearing，biting，destroying，in a madness that he had never known before．Nothing could stop him，and soon the Yeehats were running，wild with fear，back to the forest Buck followed for some time，then returned to the camp．
　　He found Pete，killed in his bed． He followed Thornton's smell to a deep pool，and found Skeet lying dead by the edge．Thornton's body was somewhere under the water．
　　All day Buck stayed by the pool or walked restlessly round the camp． But when the evening came， he heard new sounds from the forest；the wolves had come south for the winter，and were moving into Buck's valley．They came into the camp in the moonlight，and Buck stood silently，waiting for them．Suddenly，the bravest wolf jumped at Buck．In a second，Buck had bitten，and then stood still again．The wolf was dead behind him．Three more wolves jumped at him，and were killed．
　　Then the pack attacked in a crowd all at once．But not one of them could bring Buck down；he was too quick，too strong，too clever for them all．After half an hour the pack stopped attacking and moved away．Then one wolf moved forward slowly， in a friendly way；it was the wolf that Buck had met before in the forest．They touched noses．Then another wolf came forward to make friends，and another．Soon the pack was all around Buck，and the call of the wild was loud in Buck's ears．And when the wolves moved on， back into the forest，Buck ran with them，side by side
　　That is perhaps the end of Buck's story．But after a few years，the Yeehats noticed that some of the wolves had golden brown in their grey coats．They also talked of a Ghost Dog that ran at the head of the pack．
　　And sometimes men were found dead，killed by the teeth of a terrible animal．And each autumn，when the Yeehats follow the moose，there is one valley that they will not go into．
　　In the summers there is one visitor to that valley： a large，golden-brown wolf，larger than any other wolf．He walks alone round the lake where the yellow gold shines in the water, and howls．But he is not always alone．In the long winter nights，he runs at the head of the wolf pack through the moonlight，calling into the night with them，singing a song from a younger world．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Secret Garden by Frances Hodgson Burnett





■ 1 Little Miss Mary
　　Nobody seemed to care about Mary．She was born in India，where her father was a British official．He was busy with his work，and her mother，who was very beautiful， spent all her time going to parties．So an Indian woman，Kamala，was paid to take care of the little girl．Mary was not a pretty child．She had a thin angry face and thin yellow hair． She was always giving orders to Kamala，who had to obey． Mary never thought of other people， but only of herself．In fact，she was a very selfish，disagreeable，bad-tempered little girl．
　　One very hot morning，when she was about nine years old， she woke up and saw that instead of Kamala there was a different Indian servant by her bed．
　　‘What are you doing here？’she asked crossly．‘Go away！ And send Kamala to me at once！’
　　The woman looked afraid．‘I'm sorry，Miss Mary，she— she—she can't come！’
　　Something strange was happening that day．Some of the house servants were missing and everybody looked frightened． But nobody told Mary anything，and Kamala still did not come．So at last Mary went out into the garden，and played by herself under a tree．She pretended she was making her own flower garden，and picked large red flowers to push into the ground．All the time she was saying crossly to herself，
　　‘I hate Kamala！I'll hit her when she comes back！’
　　Just then she saw her mother coming into the garden，with a young Englishman．They did not notice the child，who listened to their conversation．
　　‘It's very bad，is it？’her mother asked the young man in a worried voice．
　　‘Very bad，’he answered seriously．‘People are dying like flies．It's dangerous to stay in this town．You should go to the hills，where there's no disease．’
　　‘Oh，I know！’she cried．‘We must leave soon！’
　　Suddenly they heard loud cries coming from the servants’rooms，at the side of the house．
　　‘What's happened？’cried Mary's mother wildly．
　　‘I think one of your servants has just died．You didn't tell me the disease is here，in your house！’
　　‘I didn't know！’she screamed．‘Quick，come with me！’And together they ran into the house．
　　Now Mary understood what was wrong．The terrible disease had already killed many people in the town，and in all the houses people were dying．In Mary's house it was Kamala who had just died．Later that day three more servants died there．
　　All through the night and the next day people ran in and out of the house，shouting and crying．Nobody thought of Mary． She hid in her bedroom，frightened by the strange and terrible sounds that she heard around her．Sometimes she cried and sometimes she slept．
　　When she woke the next day，the house was silent．
　　‘Perhaps the disease has gone，’she thought，‘and everybody is well again．I wonder who will take care of me instead of Kamala？Why doesn't someone bring me some food？It's strange the house is so quiet．’
　　But just then she heard men's voices in the hall．
　　‘How sad！’ said one．‘That beautiful woman！’
　　‘There was a child too，wasn't there？’said the other．‘Although none of us ever saw her．’
　　Mary was standing in the middle of her room when they opened the door a few minutes later．The two men jumped back in surprise．
　　‘My name is Mary Lennox，’she said crossly．‘I was asleep when everyone was ill，and now I'm hungry．’
　　‘It's the child，the one nobody ever saw！’said the older man to the other．‘They've all forgotten her！’
　　‘Why was I forgotten？’asked Mary angrily．‘Why has nobody come to take care of me？’
　　The younger man looked at her very sadly．‘Poor child！’ he said．‘You see，there's nobody left alive in the house．So nobody can come．’
　　In this strange and sudden way Mary learnt that both her mother and her father had died．The few servants who had not died had run away in the night．No one had remembered little Miss Mary．She was all alone．
　　Because she had never known her parents well，she did not miss them at all．She only thought of herself，as she had always done．
　　‘Where will I live？’she wondered．‘I hope I'll stay with people who'll let me do what I want．’
　　At first she was taken to an English family who had known her parents．She hated their untidy house and noisy children， and preferred playing by herself in the garden．One day she was playing her favourite game，pretending to make a garden， when one of the children，Basil，offered to help．
　　‘Go away！’cried Mary．‘I don't want your help！’
　　For a moment Basil looked angry，and then he began to laugh He danced round and round Mary，and sang a funny little song about Miss Mary and her stupid flowers．This made Mary very cross indeed．No one had ever laughed at her so unkindly．
　　‘You're going home soon，’said Basil．‘And we're all very pleased you're leaving！’
　　‘I'm pleased too，’replied Mary．‘But where's home？’
　　‘You're stupid if you don't know that！’laughed Basil． England，of course！You're going to live with your uncle，Mr Archibald Graven．’
　　‘I've never heard of him，’said Mary coldly．
　　‘But I know about him because I heard Father and Mother talking，’said Basil．‘He lives in a big lonely old house，and has no friends，because he's so badtempered．He's got a crooked back，and he's horrid！’
　　‘I don't believe you！’cried Mary．But the next day Basil's parents explained that she was going to live with her uncle in Yorkshire，in the north of England．Mary looked bored and cross and said nothing．
　　After the long sea journey，she was met in London by Mr Craven's housekeeper，Mrs Medlock．Together they travelled north by train．Mrs Medlock was a large woman，with a very red face and bright black eyes．Mary did not like her，but that was not surprising，because she did not usually like people．Mrs Medlock did not like Mary either．
　　‘What a disagreeable child！’thought the housekeeper．‘But perhaps I should talk to her．’
　　‘I can tell you a bit about your uncle if you like，’she said aloud．‘He lives in a big old house，a long way from anywhere． There are nearly a hundred rooms，but most of them are shut and locked．There's a big park round the house，and all kinds of gardens．Well，what do you think of that？’
　　‘Nothing，’replied Mary．‘It doesn't matter to me．’
　　Mrs Medlock laughed．‘You're a hard little girl！Well，if you don't care，Mr Craven doesn't either．He never spends time on anyone．He's got a crooked back，you see，and although he's always been rich，he was never really happy until he married．’
　　‘Married？’repeated Mary in surprise．
　　‘Yes，he married a sweet，pretty girl，and he loved her deeply．So when she died—’
　　‘Oh！Did she die？’asked Mary，interested．
　　‘Yes，she did．And now he doesn't care about anybody．If he's at home，he stays in his room and sees nobody．He won't want to see you，so you must stay out of his way and do what you're told．’
　　Mary stared out of the train window at the grey sky and the rain．She was not looking forward to life at her uncle's house．
　　The train journey lasted all day，and it was dark when they arrived at the station．Then there was a long drive to get to the house．It was a cold，windy night，and it was raining heavily． After a while Mary began to hear a strange，wild noise．She looked out of the window，but could see nothing except the darkness．
　　‘What's that noise？’she asked Mrs Medlock．‘It's—It's not the sea，is it？’
　　‘No，that's the moor．It's the sound the wind makes，blowing across the moor．’
　　‘What is a moor？’
　　‘It's just miles and miles of wild land，with no trees or houses．Your uncle's house is right on the edge of the moor．’
　　Mary listened to the strange，frightening sound．‘I don't like it，’she thought．‘I don't like it．’She looked more disagreeable than ever．






■ 2 Mary in Yorkshire
　　They arrived at a very large old house．It looked dark and unfriendly from the outside．Inside，Mary looked around the big shadowy hall，and felt very small and lost．They went straight upstairs．Mary was shown to a room where there was a warm fire and food on the table．
　　‘This is your room，’said Mrs Medlock．‘Go to bed when you've had some supper．And remember，you must stay in your room！Mr Craven doesn't want you to wander all over the house！’
　　When Mary woke up the next morning，she saw a young servant girl cleaning the fireplace．The room seemed dark and rather strange，with pictures of dogs and horses and ladies on the walls．It was not a child's room at all．From the window she could not see any trees or houses，only wild land，which looked like a kind of purple sea．
　　‘Who are you？’she asked the servant coldly．
　　‘Martha，miss，’answered the girl with a smile．
　　‘And what's that outside？’Mary continued．
　　‘That's the moor，’smiled Martha．‘Do you like it？’
　　‘No，’replied Mary immediately．‘I hate it．’
　　‘That's because you don't know it．You will like it．I love it．It's lovely in spring and summer when there are flowers．It always smells so sweet．The air's so fresh，and the birds sing so beautifully．I never want to leave the moor．’
　　Mary was feeling very badtempered．‘You're a strange servant，’she said．‘In India we don't have conversations with servants．We give orders，and they obey，and that's that．’
　　Martha did not seem to mind Mary's crossness．
　　‘I know I talk too much！’she laughed．
　　‘Are you going to be my servant？’asked Mary．
　　‘Well，not really．I work for Mrs Medlock．I'm going to clean your room and bring you your food，but you won't need a servant except for those things．’
　　‘But who's going to dress me？’
　　Martha stopped cleaning，and stared at Mary．
　　‘Tha’canna'dress thysen？’she asked，shocked．
　　‘What do you mean？ I don't understand your language！’
　　‘Oh，I forgot．We all speak the Yorkshire dialect here，but of course you don't understand that．I meant to say，can't you put on your own clothes？’
　　‘Of course not！My servant always used to dress me．’
　　‘Well！I think you should learn to dress yourself．My mother always says people should be able to take care of themselves， even if they're rich and important．’
　　Little Miss Mary was furious with Martha．‘It's different in India where I come from！You don't know anything about India，or about servants，or about anything！You… you…’She could not explain what she meant．Suddenly she felt very confused and lonely．She threw herself down on the bed and started cryiny wildly．
　　‘Now，now，don't cry like that，’Martha said gently．‘I'm very sorry．You're right，I don't know anything about anything．Please stop crying，miss．’
　　She sounded kind and friendly，and Mary began to feel better and soon stopped crying．Martha went on talking as she finished her cleaning，but Mary looked out of the window in a bored way，and pretended not to listen．
　　‘I've got eleven brothers and sisters，you know，miss． There's not much money in our house．And they all eat so much food！Mother says it's the good fresh air on the moor that makes them so hungry．My brother Dickon，he's always out on the moor．He's twelve，and he's got a horse which he rides sometimes．’
　　‘Where did he get it？’asked Mary．She had always wanted an animal of her own，and so she began to feel a little interest in Dickon．
　　‘Oh，it's a wild horse，but he's a kind boy，and animals like him，you see．Now you must have your breakfast，miss．Here it is on the table．’
　　‘I don't want it，’said Mary．‘I'm not hungry．’
　　‘What！’ cried Martha．‘My little brothers and sisters would eat all this in five minutes！’
　　‘Why？’asked Mary coldly．
　　‘Because they don't get enough to eat，that's why，and they're always hungry．You're very lucky to have the food， miss．’Mary said nothing，but she drank some tea and ate a little bread．
　　‘Now put a coat on and run outside to play，’said Martha．‘It'll do you good to be in the fresh air．’
　　Mary looked out of the window at the cold grey sky．‘Why should I go out on a day like this？’she asked．
　　‘Well，there's nothing to play with indoors，is there？’
　　Mary realized Martha was right．‘But who will go with me？’she said．
　　Martha stared at her．‘Nobody．You'll have to learn to play by yourself Dickon plays by himself on the moors for hours， with the wild birds，and the sheep，and the other animals．’She looked away for a moment．‘Perhaps I shouldn't tell you this， but—but one of the walled gardens is locked up．Nobody's been in it for ten years．It was Mrs Graven's garden，and when she died so suddenly，Mr Craven locked it and buried the key— Oh，I must go，I can hear Mrs Medlock's bell ringing for me．’
　　Mary went downstairs and wandered through the great empty gardens．Many of the fruit and vegetable gardens had walls round them，but there were no locked doors．She saw an old man digging in one of the vegetable gardens，but he looked cross and unfriendly，so she walked on．
　　‘How ugly it all looks in winter！’she thought．‘But what a mystery the locked garden is！Why did my uncle bury the key？If he loved his wife，why did he hate her garden？Perhaps I'll never know．I don't suppose I'll like him if I ever meet him．And he won't like me，so I won't be able to ask him．’
　　Just then she noticed a robin singing to her from a tree on the other side of a wall．‘I think that tree's in the secret garden！’she told herself．‘There's an extra wall here，and there's no way in．’
　　She went back to where the gardener was digging，and spoke to him．At first he answered in a very badtempered way，but suddenly the robin flew down near them，and the old man began to smile．He looked a different person then，and Mary thought how much nicer people looked when they smiled．The gardener spoke gently to the robin，and the pretty little bird hopped on the ground near them．
　　‘He's my friend，he is，’said the old man．‘There aren't any other robins in the garden，so he's a bit lonely．’He spoke in strong Yorkshire dialect，so Mary had to listen carefully to understand him．
　　She looked very hard at the robin．‘I'm lonely too，’she said．She had not realized this before．
　　‘What's your name？’she asked the gardener．
　　‘Ben Weatherstaff．I'm lonely myself．The robin's my only friend，you see．’
　　‘I haven't got any friends at all，’said Mary．
　　Yorkshire people always say what they are thinking，and old Ben was a Yorkshire moor man．‘We're alike，you and me，’he told Mary．‘We're not pretty to look at，and we're both very disagreeable．’
　　Nobody had ever said this to Mary before．‘Am I really as ugly and disagreeable as Ben？’she wondered．
　　Suddenly the robin flew to a tree near Mary and started singing to her．Ben laughed loudly．
　　‘Well！’he said．‘He wants to be your friend！’
　　‘Oh！Would you please be my friend？’she whispered to the robin．She spoke in a soft，quiet voice and old Ben looked at her in surprise．
　　‘You said that really nicely！’he said．‘You sound like Dickon，when he talks to animals on the moor．’
　　‘Do you know Dickon？’asked Mary．But just then the robin flew away．‘Oh look，he's flown into the garden with no door！ Please，Ben，how can I get into it？’
　　Ben stopped smiling and picked up his spade．‘You can't， and that's that．It's not your business．Nobody can find the door．Run away and play，will you？I must get on with my work．’And he walked away．He did not even say goodbye．
　　In the next few days Mary spent almost all her time in the gardens．The fresh air from the moor made her hungry，and she was becoming stronger and healthier．One day she noticed the robin again．He was on top of a wall，singing to her．‘Good morning！Isn't this fun！Come this way！’he seemed to say， as he hopped along the wall．Mary began to laugh as she danced along beside him．‘I know the secret garden's on the other side of this wall！’she thought excitedly．‘And the robin lives there！But where's the door？’
　　That evening she asked Martha to stay and talk to her beside the fire after supper．They could hear the wind blowing round the old house， but the room was warm and comfortable． Mary only had one idea in her head．
　　‘Tell me about the secret garden，’she said．
　　‘Well，all right then，miss，but we aren't supposed to talk about it，you know．It was Mrs Graven's favourite garden，and she and Mr Craven used to take care of it themselves．They spent hours there，reading and talking．Very happy，they were． They used the branch of an old tree as a seat．But one day when she was sitting on the branch，it broke，and she fell．She was very badly hurt and the next day she died．That's why he hates the garden so much，and won't let anyone go in there．’
　　‘How sad！’said Mary．‘Poor Mr Craven！’It was the first time that she had ever felt sorry for anyone．
　　Just then，as she was listening to the wind outside，she heard another noise，in the house．
　　‘Can you hear a child crying？’she asked Martha．
　　Martha looked confused．‘Er—no，’she replied．‘No，I think…it must be the wind．’
　　But at that moment the wind blew open their door and they heard the crying very clearly．
　　‘I told you！’cried Mary．
　　At once Martha shut the door．‘It was the wind，’she repeated．But she did not speak in her usual natural way，and Mary did not believe her．
　　The next day it was very rainy，so Mary did not go out．Instead she decided to wander round the house，looking into some of the hundred rooms that Mrs Medlock had told her about． She spent all morning going in and out of dark，silent rooms， which were full of heavy furniture and old pictures．She saw no servants at all，and was on her way back to her room for lunch， when she heard a cry．‘It's a bit like the cry that I heard last night！’she thought．Just then the housekeeper，Mrs Medlock， appeared，with her keys in her hand．
　　‘What are you doing here？’she asked crossly．
　　‘I didn't know which way to go，and I heard someone crying，’answered Mary．
　　‘You didn't hear anything！Go back to you room now． And if you don't stay there，I'll lock you in！’
　　Mary hated Mrs Medlock for this．‘There was someone crying，I know there was！’she said to herself．‘But I'll discover who it is soon！’She was almost beginning to enjoy herself in Yorkshire．






■ 3 Finding the secret garden
　　When Mary woke up two days later，the wind and rain had all disappeared，and the sky was a beautiful blue．‘Spring'll be here soon，’said Martha happily．‘You'll love the moor then，when it's full of flowers and birds．’
　　‘Could I get to the moor？’asked Mary．
　　‘You've never done much walking，have you？I don't think you could walk the five miles to our cottage！’
　　‘But I'd like to meet your family，’Mary said．
　　Martha looked at the little girl for a moment．She remembered how disagreeable Mary had been when she first arrived． But now，Mary looked interested and friendly．
　　‘I'll ask Mother，’said Martha．‘She can always think of a good plan．She's sensible and hardworking and kind— I know you'll like her．’
　　‘I like Dickon，although I've never seen him．’
　　‘I wonder what Dickon will think of you？’
　　‘He won't like me，’said Mary．‘No one does．’
　　‘But do you like yourself？That's what Mother would ask．’
　　‘No，not really．I've never thought of that．’
　　‘Well，I must go now．It's my day off，so I'm going home to help Mother with the housework．Goodbye，miss．See you tomorrow．’
　　Mary felt lonelier than ever when Martha had gone，so she went outside．The sunshine made the gardens look different．And the change in the weather had even made Ben Weatherstaff easier to talk to．
　　‘Can you smell spring in the air？’he asked her．‘Things are growing，deep down in the ground．Soon you'll see little green shoots coming up—young plants，they are．You watch them．’
　　‘I will'replied Mary．‘Oh，there's the robin！’The little bird hopped on to Ben's spade．‘Are things growing in the garden where he lives？’
　　‘What garden？’said Ben，in his badtempered voice．
　　‘You know，the secret garden．Are the flowers dead there？’ She really wanted to know the answer．
　　‘Ask the robin，’said Ben crossly．‘He's the only one who's been in there for the last ten years．’
　　Ten years was a long time，Mary thought．She had been born ten years ago．She walked away，thinking．She had begun to like the gardens，and the robin，and Martha and Dickon and their mother．Before she came to Yorkshire，she had not liked anybody．
　　She was walking beside the long wall of the secret garden， when a most wonderful thing happened．She suddenly realized the robin was following her．She felt very pleased and excited by this，and cried out，‘You like me，don't you？And I like you too！’As he hopped along beside her，she hopped and sang too，to show him that she was his friend．Just then he stopped at a place where a dog had dug a hole in the ground．As Mary looked at the hole，she noticed something almost buried there． She put her hand in and pulled it out．It was an old key．
　　‘Perhaps it's been buried for ten years，’she whispered to herself．‘Perhaps it's the key to the secret garden！’
　　She looked at it for a long time．How lovely it would be to find the garden，and see what had happened to it in the last ten years！She could play in it all by herself，and nobody would know she was there．She put the key safely in her pocket．
　　The next morning Martha was back at Misselthwaite Manor，and told Mary all about her day with her family．
　　‘I really enjoyed myself．I helped Mother with the whole week's washing and baking．And I told the children about you． They wanted to know about your servants，and the ship that brought you to England，and everything！’
　　‘I can tell you some more for next time，’offered Mary． ‘They'd like to hear about riding on elephants and camels， wouldn't they？’
　　‘Oh，that would be kind of you，miss！And look，Mother has sent you a present！’
　　‘A present！’repeated Mary．How could a family of fourteen hungry people give anyone a present！
　　‘Mother bought it from a man who came to the door to sell things．She told me，“Martha，you've brought me your pay，like a good girl，and we need it all，but I'm going to buy something for that lonely child at the Manor，”and she bought one，and here it is！’
　　It was a skippingrope．Mary stared at it．
　　‘What is it？’she asked．
　　‘Don't they have skippingropes in India？Well，this is how you use it．Just watch me．’
　　Martha took the rope and ran into the middle of the room． She counted up to a hundred as she skipped．
　　‘That looks lovely，’said Mary ．‘Your mother is very kind．Do you think I could ever skip like that？’
　　‘Just try，’said Martha．‘Mother says it'll make you strong and healthy．Skip outside in the fresh air．’
　　Mary put her coat on and took the skipping-rope．As she was opening the door，she thought of something and turned round．
　　‘Martha，it was your money really．Thank you．’She never thanked people usually and she did not know how to do it．So she held out her hand，because she knew that adults did that．
　　Martha shook her hand and laughed．‘You're a strange child，’she said．‘Like an old woman！Now run away and play！’
　　The skippingrope was wonderful．Mary counted and skipped，skipped and counted，until her face was hot and red． She was having more fun than she had ever had before．She skipped through the gardens until she found Ben Weatherstaff， who was digging and talking to his robin．She wanted them both to see her skip．
　　‘Well！’said Ben．‘You're looking fine and healthy today！ Go on skipping．It's good for you．’
　　Mary skipped all the way to the secret garden wall．And there was the robin！He had followed her！Mary was very pleased．
　　‘You showed me where the key was yesterday，’she laughed．‘I've got it in my pocket．So you ought to show me the door today！’
　　The robin hopped on to an old climbing plant on the wall，and sang his most beautiful song．Suddenly the wind made the plant move，and Mary saw something under the dark green leaves．The thick，heavy plant was covering a door．Mary's heart was beating fast and her hands were shaking as she pushed the leaves away and found the keyhole．She took the key out of her pocket，and it fitted the hole．Using both hands， she managed to unlock the door．Then she turned round to see if anyone was watching．But there was no one，so she pushed the door，which opened，slowly，for the first time in ten years． She walked quickly in and shut the door behind her．At last she was inside the secret garden！
　　It was the loveliest，most exciting place she had ever seen． There were old rose trees everywhere，and the walls were covered with climbing roses．She looked carefully at the grey branches．Were the roses still alive？Ben would know．She hoped they weren't all dead．But she was inside the wonderful garden，in a world of her own．It seemed very strange and silent，but she did not feel lonely at all．Then she noticed some small green shoots coming up through the grass．So something was growing in the garden after all！When she found a lot more shoots in different places，she decided they needed more air and light，so she began to pull out the thick grass around them．She worked away，clearing the ground，for two or three hours，and had to take her coat off because she got so hot．The robin hopped around，pleased to see someone gardening．
　　She almost forgot about lunch，and when she arrived back in her room，she was very hungry and ate twice as much as usual．‘Martha，’she said as she was eating，‘I've been thinking．This is a big，lonely house，and there isn't much for me to do．Do you think，if I buy a little spade，I can make my own garden？’
　　‘That's just what Mother said，’replied Martha．‘You'd enjoy digging and watching plants growing．Dickon can get you a spade，and some seeds to plant，if you like．’
　　‘Oh，thank you，Martha！ I've got some money that Mrs Medlock gave me．Will you write and ask Dickon to buy them for me？’
　　‘I will．And he'll bring them to you himself．’
　　‘Oh！Then I'll see him．’Mary looked very excited．Then she remembered something．‘I heard that cry in the house again，Martha．It wasn't the wind this time．I've heard it three times now．Who is it？’
　　Martha looked uncomfortable．‘You mustn't go wandering around the house，you know．Mr Craven wouldn't like it．Now I must go and help the others downstairs．I'll see you at teatime．’
　　As the door closed behind Martha，Mary thought to herself， ‘This really is the strangest house that anyone ever lived in．’






■ 4 Meeting Dickon
　　Mary spent nearly a week working in the secret garden． Each day she found new shoots coming out of the ground．Soon，there would be flowers everywhere—thousands of them．It was an exciting game to her．When she was inside those beautiful old walls，no one knew where she was．
　　During that week she became more friendly with Ben，who was often digging in one of the vegetable gardens．
　　‘What are your favourite flowers，Ben？’she asked him one day．
　　‘Roses．I used to work for a young lady who loved roses，you see，and she had a lot in her garden．That was ten years ago． But she died．Very sad，it was．’
　　‘What happened to the roses？’asked Mary．
　　‘They were left there，in the garden．’
　　‘If rose branches look dry and grey，are they still alive？’ asked Mary．It was so important to know！
　　‘In the spring they'll show green shoots，and then—But why are you so interested in roses？’he asked．
　　Mary's face went red．‘I just…wanted to pretend I've got a garden．I haven't got anyone to play with．’
　　‘Well，that's true，’said Ben．He seemed to feel sorry for her．Mary decided she liked old Ben，although he was sometimes badtempered．
　　She skipped along and into the wood at the end of the gardens．Suddenly she heard a strange noise，and there in front of her was a boy．He was sitting under a tree，playing on a wooden pipe．He was about twelve，with a healthy red face and bright blue eyes．There was a squirrel and a crow in the tree， and two rabbits sitting on the grass near him．
　　‘They're listening to the music！’thought Mary．‘I mustn't frighten them！’She stood very still．
　　The boy stopped playing．‘That's right，’he said．‘Animals don't like it if you move suddenly．I'm Dickon and you must be Miss Mary．I've brought you the spade and the seeds．’
　　He spoke in an easy，friendly way．Mary liked him at once． As they were looking at the seed packets together，the robin hopped on to a branch near them．Dickon listened carefully to the robin's song．
　　‘He's saying he's your friend，he told Mary．
　　‘Really？Oh，I am pleased he likes me．Can you understand everything that birds say？’
　　‘I think I do，and they think I do．I've lived on the moor with them for so long．Sometimes I think I am a bird or an animal，not a boy at all！’His smile was the widest she had ever seen．
　　He explained how to plant the seeds．Suddenly he said，‘I can help you plant them！Where's your garden？’
　　Mary went red，then white．She had never thougt of this． What was she going to say？
　　‘Could you keep a secret？It's a great secret．If anyone discovers it，I'll…I'll die！’
　　‘I keep secrets for all the wild birds and animals on the moor．So I can keep yours too，’he replied．
　　‘I've stolen a garden，’she said very fast．‘Nobody goes into it，nobody wants it．I love it and nobody takes care of it！ They're letting it die！’And she threw her arms over her face and started crying．
　　‘Don't cry，’said Dickon gently．‘Where is it？’
　　‘Come with me and I'll show you，’said Miss Mary．
　　They went to the secret garden and entered it together． Dickon walked round，looking at everything．
　　‘Martha told me about this place，but I never thought I'd see it，’he said．‘It's wonderful！’
　　‘What about the roses？’asked Mary worriedly．‘Are they still alive？What do you think？’
　　‘Look at these shoots on the branches．Most of them are alive all right．’He took out his knife and cut away some of the dead wood from the rose trees．Mary showed him the work she had done in the garden，and they talked as they cut and cleared．
　　‘Dickon，’said Mary suddenly，‘I like you．I never thought I'd like as many as five people！’
　　‘Only five！’laughed Dickon．
　　He did look funny when he laughed，thought Mary．
　　‘Yes，your mother，Martha，the robin，Ben，and you．’Then she asked him a question in Yorkshire dialect，because that was his language．
　　‘Does tha’like me？’was her question．
　　‘Of course！I likes thee wonderful！’replied Dickon，a big smile on his round face．Mary had never been so happy．
　　When she went back to the house for her lunch，she told Martha about Dickon's visit．
　　‘I've got news for you too，’said Martha．‘Mr Craven's come home，and wants to see you！He's going away again tomorrow，for several months．’
　　‘Oh！’said Mary．That was good news．She would have all summer in the secret garden before he came back．But she must be careful．He mustn't guess her secret now．
　　Just then Mrs Medlock arrived，in her best black dress，to take Mary down to Mr Craven's room．
　　Mary's uncle had black hair with some white in it，and high， crooked shoulders．His face was not ugly，but very sad．During their conversation he watched her in a worried way．Perhaps he was thinking of other things at the same time．
　　He looked at the thin child．‘Are you well？’he asked．Mary tried to keep her voice calm as she replied，
　　‘I'm getting stronger and healthier．’
　　‘What do you want to do，in this big empty house？’
　　‘I…I just want to play outside—I enjoy that．’
　　‘Yes，Martha's mother，Susan Sowerby，spoke to me the other day．She's a sensible woman—and she said you needed fresh air．But where do you play？’ ‘Everywhere！I just skip and runand look for green shoots．I don't damage anything！’
　　‘Don't look so frightened！Of course a child like you couldn't damage anything．Play where you like．Is there anything that you want？’
　　Mary came a step nearer to him，and her voice shook a little as she spoke．‘Could Icould I have a bit of garden？’
　　Mr Craven looked very surprised．
　　‘To plant seeds in…to make them come alive！’Mary went on bravely．‘It was too hot in India，so I was always ill and tired there．But here it's different．I…I love the garden！’
　　He passed a hand quickly over his eyes．Then he looked kindly at Mary．‘I knew someone once who loved growing things，like you．Yes，child，take as much of the garden as you want．’He smiled gently at her．‘Now leave me．I'm very tired．’
　　Mary ran all the way back to her room．
　　‘Martha！’she shouted．‘Mr Graven's really a nice man，but he looks very unhappy．He said I can have my own garden！’
　　She was planning to work in the garden with Dickon every day，to make it beautiful for the summer．






■ 5 Meeting Colin
　　In the middle of the night Mary woke up．Heavy rain had started falling again，and the wind was blowing violently round the walls of the old house．Suddenly she heard crying again．This time she decided to discover who it was．She left her room，and in the darkness followed the crying sound，round corners and through doors，up and down stairs，to the other side of the big house．At last she found the right room．She pushed the door open and went in．
　　It was a big room with beautiful old furniture and pictures．In the large bed was a boy，who looked tired and cross，with a thin，white，tearful face．He stared at Mary．
　　‘Who are you？’he whispered．‘Are you a dream？’
　　‘No，I'm not．I'm Mary Lennox．Mr Craven's my uncle．’
　　‘He's my father，’said the boy．‘I'm Colin Craven．’
　　‘No one ever told me he had a son！’said Mary，very surprised．
　　‘Well，no one ever told me you'd come to live here．I'm ill，you see．I don't want people to see me and talk about me．If I live，I may have a crooked back like my father，but I'll probably die．’
　　‘What a strange house this is！’said Mary．‘So many secrets！Does your father come and see you often？’
　　‘Not often．He doesn't like seeing me because it makes him remember my mother．She died when I was born，so he almost hates me，I think．’
　　‘Why do you say you're going to die？’asked Mary．
　　‘I've always been ill．I've nearly died several times，and my back's never been strong．My doctor feels sure that I'm going to die．But he's my father's cousin，and verv poor，so he'd like me to die．Then he'd get all the money when my father dies．He gives me medicine and tells me to rest．We had a grand doctor from London once，who told me to go out in the fresh air and try to get well．But I hate fresh air．And another thing，all the servants have to do what I want，because if I'm angry，I become ill．’
　　Mary thought she liked this boy，although he seemed so strange．He asked her lots of questions，and she told him all about her life in India．
　　‘How old are you？’he asked suddenly．
　　‘I'm ten，and so are you，’replied Mary，forgetting to be careful，‘because when you were born the garden door was locked and the key was buried．And I know that was ten years ago．
　　Colin sat up in bed and looked very interested．‘What door？Who locked it？Where's the key？I want to see it．I'll make the servants tell me where it is．They'll take me there and you can come too．’
　　‘Oh，please！Don'tdon't do that！’cried Mary．
　　Colin stared at her．‘Don't you want to see it？’
　　‘Yes，but if you make them open the door，it will never be a secret again．You see，if only we know about it，if weif we can find the key，we can go and play there every day．We can help the garden come alive again．And no one will know about itexcept us！’
　　‘I see，’said Colin slowly．‘Yes，I'd like that．It'll be our secret．I've never had a secret before．’
　　‘And perhaps，’added Mary cleverly，‘we can find a boy to push you in your wheelchair，if you can't walk，and we can go there together without any other people．You'll feel better outside．I know I do．’
　　‘I'd like that，’he said dreamily．‘I think I'd like fresh air，in a secret garden．’
　　Then Mary told him about the moor，and Dickon，and Ben Weatherstaff，and the robin，and Golin listened to it all with great interest．He began to smile and look much happier．
　　‘I like having you here，’he said．‘You must come and see me every day．But I'm tired now．’
　　‘I'll sing you a song．My servant Kamala used to do that in India，’said Mary，and very soon Colin was asleep．
　　The next afternoon Mary visited Colin again，and he seemed very pleased to see her．He had sent his nurse away and had told nobody about Mary's visit．Mary had not told anybody either．They read some of his books together，and told each other stories．They were enjoying themselves and laughing loudly when suddenly the door opened．Dr Craven and Mrs Medlock came in．They almost fell over in surprise．
　　‘What's happening here？’asked Dr Craven．
　　Colin sat up straight．To Mary he looked just like an Indian prince．‘This is my cousin，Mary Lennox，’he said calmly．‘I like her．She must visit me often．’
　　‘Oh，I'm sorry，sir，’said poor Mrs Medlock to the doctor．‘I don't know how she discovered him．I told the servants to keep it a secret．’
　　‘Don't be stupid，Medlock，’said the Indian prince coldly．‘Nobody told her．She heard me crying and found me herself．Bring our tea up now．’
　　‘I'm afraid you're getting too hot and excited，my boy，’said Dr Craven．‘That's not good for you．Don't forget you're ill．’
　　‘I want to forget！’said Colin．‘I'll be angry if Mary doesn't visit me！She makes me feel better．’
　　Dr Craven did not look happy when he left the room．
　　‘What a change in the boy，sir！’said the housekeeper．‘He's usually so disagreeable with all of us．He really seems to like that strange little girl．And he does look better．’Dr Craven had to agree．






■ 6 Colin is afraid
　　Because it rained all the next week，Mary went to talk to Colin every day instead of visiting the garden．But she woke early one morning to see the sun shining into her room，and she ran out to the secret garden at once．She did not even wait to have her breakfast．It was beautifully sunny and warm，and a thousand more shoots were pushing their way out of the ground．Dickon was already there，digging hard，with the crow and a young fox beside him．
　　‘Have you seen the robin？’he asked Mary．The little bird was flying busily backwards and forwards as fast as he could，carrying pieces of dry grass．
　　‘He's building a nest！’whispered Mary．They watched the robin for a moment．Then Mary said，
　　‘I must tell you something．You probably know about Colin Craven，don't you？Well，I've met him，and I'm going to help him to get better．’
　　‘That's good news．’There was a big smile on Dickon's honest face．‘We all knew he was ill．’
　　‘He's afraid he'll have a crooked back like his father．I think that's what's making him ill．’
　　‘Perhaps we can bring him here and let him rest under the trees．That'll do him good．That's what we'll do．’
　　They had a lot of gardening and planning to do and Mary did not have time to visit Colin that day．When she came back to the house in the evening，Martha told her that the servants had had trouble with Colin．
　　‘He's been very badtempered all afternoon with all of us，because you didn't come，miss．’
　　‘Well，I was busy．He'll have to learn not to be so selfish，’replied Mary coldly．She forgot how selfish she had been when she was ill in India．‘I'll go and see him now．’
　　When she went into his room，he was lying in bed，looking tired．He did not turn to look at her．
　　‘What's the matter with you？’she asked crossly．
　　‘My back aches and my head hurts．Why dldn't you come this afternoon？’
　　‘I was working in the garden with Dickon．’
　　‘I won't let that boy come to the garden if you stay with him instead of talking to me！’
　　Mary suddenly became very angry．‘If you send Dickon away，I'll never come into this room again！’
　　‘You'll have to，if I say so．I'll make the servants bring you in here．’
　　‘Oh，will you，prince！But no one can make me talk to you．I won't look at you．I'll stare at the floor！’
　　‘You selfish girl！’cried Colin．
　　‘You're more selfish than I am．You're the most selfish boy I've ever met！’
　　‘I'm not as selfish as your fine Dickon！He keeps you playing outside when he knows I'm ill and alone！’
　　Mary had never been so furious．‘Dickon is nicer than any other boy in the world！He's like an angel！’
　　‘An angel！Don't make me laugh！He's just a poor country boy，with holes in his shoes！’
　　‘He's a thousand times better than you are！’
　　Colin had never argued with anyone like himself in his life，and in fact it was good for him．But now he was beginning to feel sorry for himself．
　　‘I'm always ill，’he said，and started to cry．‘I'm sure my back is a bit crooked．And I'm going to die！’
　　‘No，you're not！’said Mary crossly．
　　Colin opened his eyes very wide．Nobody had said that to him before．He was angry，but a bit pleased at the same time．‘What do you mean？You know I'm going to die！Everybody says I'm going to die！’
　　‘I don't believe it！’said Mary in her most disagreeable voice．‘You just say that to make people feel sorry for you．You're too horrid to die！’
　　Colin forgot about his painful back and sat up in bed．‘Get out of the room at once！’he shouted，and threw a book at her．
　　‘I'm going，’Mary shouted in reply，‘and I won't come back！’The door banged shut behind her．
　　When she reached her own room，she had decided never to tell him her great secret．‘He can stay in his room and die if he 66wants！’she thought．But soon she began to remember how ill he had been，and how frightened he was，frightened that one day his back would become as crooked as his father's．‘Perhaps…perhaps I'll go back and see him tomorrow！’
　　That night she was woken by the most terrible screams that she had ever heard．Servants were opening and shutting doors and running about．
　　‘It's Colin！’thought Mary．‘He'll go on screaming until he makes himself really ill！How selfish he is！Somebody should stop him！’
　　Just then Martha ran into the room．‘We don't know what to do！’she cried．‘He likes you，miss！Come and see if you can make him calmer，please！’
　　‘Well，I'm very cross with him，’said Mary，and jumped out of bed．‘I'm going to stop him！’
　　‘That's right，’said Martha．‘He needs someone like you，to argue with．It'll give him something new to think about．’
　　Mary ran into Colin's room，right up to his bed．
　　‘Stop screaming！’she shouted furiously．‘Stop at once！I hate you！Everybody hates you！You'll die if you go on screaming like this，and I hope you will！’
　　The screams stopped immediately．This was the first time that anyone had spoken so angrily to Colin，and he was shocked．But he went on crying quietly to himself．
　　‘My back's becoming crooked，I can feel it！I know I'm going to die！’Large tears ran down his face．
　　‘Don't be stupid！’cried Mary．‘There's nothing the matter with your horrid back！Martha，come here and help me look at his back！’
　　Martha and Mrs Medlock were standing at the door，staring at Mary，their mouths half open．They both looked very frightened．Martha came forward to help，and Miss Mary looked carefully at Colin's thin white back，up and down．Her face was serious and angry at the same time．The room was very quiet．
　　‘There's nothing wrong with your back！’she said at last．‘Nothing at all！It's as straight as mine！’
　　Only Colin knew how important those crossly spoken，childish words were．All his life he had been afraid to ask about his back，and his terrible fear had made him ill．Now an angry little girl told him his back was straight，and he believed her．He was no longer afraid．
　　They were both calmer now．He gave Mary his hand．‘I thinkI'm almost sure I will live，if we can go out in the garden together sometimes．I'm very tired now．Will you stay with me until I go to sleep？’
　　The servants went out very quietly．
　　‘I'll tell you all about the secret garden，’whispered Mary．‘I think it's full of roses and beautiful flowers．Birds like making their nests there because it's so quiet and safe．And perhaps our robin…
　　But Colin was already asleep．
　　The next day Mary met Dickon as usual in the secret garden，and told him about Colin．Mary loved Dickon's Yorkshire dialect and was trying to learn it herself．She spoke a little now．
　　‘We mun get poor Colin out here in th'sunshine—an’we munnot lose no time about it！’
　　Dickon laughed．‘Well done！I didn't know you could speak Yorkshire！You're right．We must bring Colin to the garden as soon as we can．’
　　So that afternoon she went to see Colin．
　　‘I'm sorry I said I'd send Dickon away，’he said．‘I hated you when you said he was like an angel！’
　　‘Well，he's a funny kind of angel，but he understands wild animals better than anyone．’Suddenly，Mary knew that this was the right moment to tell him．She caught hold of his hands．‘Colin，this is important．Can you keep a secret？’
　　‘Yes—yes！’he whispered excitedly．‘What is it？’
　　‘We've found the door into the secret garden！’
　　‘Oh Mary！Will I live long enough to see it？’
　　‘Of course you will！Don't be stupid！’said Mary crossly．But it was a very natural thing to say，and they both laughed．
　　Colin told Mrs Medlock and the doctor that he wanted to go out in his wheelchair．At first the doctor was worried the boy would get too tired，but when he heard that Dickon would push the wheelchair，he agreed．
　　‘Dickon's a sensible boy，’he told Colin．‘But don't forget—’
　　‘I've told you，I want to forget that I'm ill，’said Colin in his prince's voice．‘Don't you understand？It's because my cousin makes me forget that I feel better when I'm with her．’






■ 7 Colin and the garden
　　Of course，it was most important that no one should see Colin，Mary，or Dickon entering the secret garden．So Colin gave orders to the gardeners that they must all keep away from that part of the garden in future．
　　The next afternoon Colin was carried downstairs by a man servant，and put in his wheelchair outside the front door．Dickon arrived，with his crow，two squirrels and the fox，and started pushing the wheelchair gently away from the house，and into the gardens．Mary walked beside the chair．
　　Spring had really arrived now and it seemed very exciting to Colin，who had lived indoors for so long．He smelt the warm air from the moor，and watched the little white clouds in the blue sky．In a very short time he heard Mary say，‘This is where I found the key…and this is the door…and this…this is the secret garden！’
　　Colin covered his eyes with his hands until he was inside the four high walls，and the door was shut again．Then he looked round at the roses climbing the old red walls，the pink and white flowers on the fruit trees，and the birds and the butterflies everywhere．The sun warmed his face，and he suddenly knew he felt different．
　　‘Mary！Dickon！’he cried．‘I'm going to get better！I'm going to live for ever and ever and ever！’
　　As Dickon pushed the wheelchair all round the garden，he told Colin the names of all the plants．The sun shone，the birds sang，and in every corner of the garden there was something interesting to look at．The three children talked and laughed，and by the end of the afternoon all three were speaking Yorkshire together．
　　‘I'll come back here every afternoon，’said Colin．‘I want to watch things growing．’
　　‘Soon you'll be strong enough to walk and dig．You'll be able to help us with the gardening，’said Dickon kindly．
　　‘Do you really think I'll be able to…to walk and…dig？’asked Colin．
　　‘Of course you will．You've got legs，like us！’
　　‘But they're not very strong，’answered Colin．‘They shake，and…and I'm afraid to stand on them．’
　　‘When you want to use them，you'll be able to，’said Dickon．The garden was quiet for a moment．
　　Suddenly Colin said，‘Who's that？’Mary turned her head，and noticed Ben Weatherstaff's angry face looking at her over the garden wall．
　　‘What are you doing in that garden，young miss？’he shouted．He had not seen Colin or Dickon．
　　‘The robin showed me the way，Ben，’she replied．
　　‘You…you—’He stopped shouting and his mouth dropped open as he saw Dickon pushing a boy in a wheelchair over the grass towards him．
　　‘Do you know who I am？’asked the boy in the chair．
　　Old Ben stared．‘You've got your mother's eyes，’he said in a shaking voice．‘Yes，I know you．You're Mr Craven's son，the little boy with the crooked back．’
　　Colin forgot that he had ever had backache．‘My back's as straight as yours is！’he shouted．
　　Ben stared and stared．He only knew what he had heard from the servants．‘You haven't got a crooked back？’he asked．‘Or crooked legs？’
　　That was too much．Colin was furious，and it made him feel strong．
　　‘Come here，Dickon！’he shouted，and threw off his blanket．Dickon was by his side in a second．Mary felt sick with fear．Could Colin stand？
　　Then Colin's thin feet were on the grass and he was standing，holding Dickon's arm．He looked strangely tall，and he held his head very high．
　　‘Look at me！’he shouted at Ben．‘Just look at me！’
　　‘He's as straight as any boy in Yorkshire！’said Dickon．
　　Tears were running down Ben's brown old face．‘They said you were going to die！he whispered．
　　‘Well，you can see that's not true，’said Colin．‘Now，get down from the wall and come here．I want to talk to you．You've got to help us keep the garden a secret．’
　　‘Yes，sir，’said old Ben，as he dried his eyes．
　　That was the first of many beautiful afternoons in the secret garden．Colin was brought there by Dickon and Mary nearly every day，and he saw all the changes that happened there during the spring and early summer．Ben Weatherstaff，now in the secret，joined them as often as he could．
　　One day Colin spoke to all of them．‘Listen，everybody．I think there's something like magic that makes gardens grow and things happen．Perhaps if I believe in it，the magic will make me strong．Let's all sit down in a circle and ask the magic to work．’
　　So they all sat on the grass in a circle，Dickon with his crow，his fox and the two squirrels，Mary，Colin，and Ben．Colin repeated these words several times．‘The sun's shining．That's the magic．Being strong．That's the magic．Magic！Help me！Magic！Help me！’
　　At last Colin stopped．‘Now I'm going to walk round the garden，’he said，and took Dickon's arm．Slowly he walked from one wall to another，followed closely by Mary and Ben．And when he had walked all the way round，he said，‘You see！I can walk now！The magic worked！’
　　‘It's wonderful！’cried Mary．‘Your father will think he is dreaming when he sees you！’
　　‘I won't tell him yet．I'm going to keep it a secret from everybody．I'll come to the garden and walk and run a little more every day until I'm as healthy as any other boy．Then，when my father comes home，I'll walk up to him and say，“Here I am，Father．You see？ I'm not going to die！”’
　　Now began a difficult time for Colin and Mary．Dickon told his mother about it one evening as he was digging the cottage garden．
　　‘You see，mother，they don't want the doctor or the servants to guess that Colin can walk and is getting better．So they have to pretend he's still ill and just as disagreeable as he used to be！’
　　‘If they're running about all day in the fresh air，that'll make them hungry，I should think！’
　　‘Yes，that's the problem．They're both getting fatter and healthier，and they really enjoy their food now．But they have to send some of it back to the kitchen，uneaten．If they eat it all，people will realize how healthy they are！Sometimes they're very hungry！’
　　‘I know what we can do，’said Mrs Sowerby．‘You can take some fresh milk and some of my newly baked bread to the garden in the mornings．If they have that，it'll do them a lot of good！What a game those children are playing！’And she laughed until tears came to her eyes．
　　One afternoon when they were all working in the garden，the door opened and a woman came quietly in．
　　‘It's Mother！’cried Dickon，and ran towards her．‘I told her where the door was，because I knew she would keep the secret．’
　　Colin held out his hand to her．‘I've wanted to see you for a long time，’he said．
　　‘Dear boy！’Susan Sowerby whispered，holding his hand．‘You're so like your mother！’
　　‘Do you think，’asked Colin carefully，‘that will make my father like me？’
　　‘I'm sure it will，’she answered warmly．‘He must see you —he must come home now．’
　　‘You see how healthy the boy is，Susan？’asked old Ben．‘Look how strong and straight his legs are now！’
　　‘Yes，’she laughed．‘Playing and working outside，and eating good Yorkshire food，has made him strong．And Miss Mary too，’she added，turning to Mary．‘Mrs Medlock heard that your mother was a pretty woman．You'll soon be as pretty as she was．’
　　‘Do you believe in magic？’Colin asked her．
　　‘I do，’she answered，‘but everybody gives it a different name．It makes the sun shine and the seeds grow—and it has made you healthy．’
　　She sat down on the grass and stayed for a while，talking and laughing with the children in the quiet，sunny garden．When she stood up to leave，Colin suddenly put out a hand to her．
　　‘I wish—you were my mother！’he whispered．
　　Mrs Sowerby put her arms round him and held him to her．‘Dear boy！You're as close to your mother as you could be，here in her garden．And your father'll come back soon！’






■ 8 Mr Craven comes home
　　While the secret garden was returning to life，a man with high，crooked shoulders was wandering round the most beautiful places in Europe．For ten years he had lived this lonely life，his heart full of sadness and his head full of dark dreams．Everywhere he．went，he carried his unhappiness with him like a black cloud．Other travellers thought he was half mad or a man who could not forget some terrible crime．His name was Archibald Craven．
　　But one day，as he sat by a mountain stream，he actually looked at a flower，and for the first time in ten years he realized how beautiful something living could be．The valley seemed very quiet as he sat there，staring at the flower．He felt strangely calm．
　　‘What is happening to me？’he whispered．‘I feel different —I almost feel I'm alive again！’
　　At that moment，hundreds of miles away in Yorkshire，Colin was seeing the secret garden for the first time，and saying，‘I'm going to live for ever and ever and ever！’But Mr Craven did not know this．
　　That night，in his hotel room，he slept better than usual．As the weeks passed，he even began to think a little about his home and his son．One evening in late summer，as he was sitting quietly beside a lake，he felt the strange calmness again．He fell asleep，and had a dream that seemed very real．He heard a voice calling him．It was sweet and clear and happy，the voice of his young wife．
　　‘Archie！Archie！Archie！’
　　‘My dear！’He jumped up．‘Where are you？’
　　‘In the garden！’called the beautiful voice．
　　And then the dream ended．In the morning，when he woke，he remembered the dream．
　　‘She says she's in the garden！’he thought．‘But the door's locked and the key's buried．’
　　That morning he received a letter from Susan Sowerby．In it she asked him to come home，but she did not give a reason．Mr Craven thought of his dream，and decided to return to England immediately．On the long journey back to Yorkshire，he was thinking about Colin．
　　‘I wonder how he is！I wanted to forget him，because he makes me think of his mother．He lived，and she died！But perhaps I've been wrong．Susan Sowerby says I should go home，so perhaps she thinks I can help him．’
　　When he arrived home，he found the housekeeper very confused about Colin's health．
　　‘He's very strange，sir，’said Mrs Medlock．‘ He looks better，it's true，but some days he eats nothing at all，and other days he eats just like a healthy boy．He used to scream even at the idea of fresh air，but now he spends all his time outside in his wheelchair，with Miss Mary and Dickon Sowerby．He's in the garden at the moment．’
　　‘In the garden！’repeated Mr Craven．Those were the words of the dream！He hurried out of the house and towards the place which he had not visited for so long．He found the door with the climbing plant over it，and stood outside，listening，for a moment．
　　‘Surely I can hear voices inside the garden？’he thought．‘Aren't there children whispering，laughing，running in there？Or am I going mad？’
　　And then the moment came，when the children could not stay quiet．There was wild laughing and shouting，and the door was thrown open．A boy ran out，a tall，healthy，handsome boy，straight into the man's arms．Mr Craven stared into the boy's laughing eyes．
　　‘Who—What？Who？’he cried．
　　Colin had not planned to meet his father like this．But perhaps this was the best way，to come running out with his cousin and his friend．
　　‘Father，’he said，‘I'm Colin．You can't believe it！I can't believe it myself．It was the garden，and Mary and Dickon and the magic，that made me well．We've kept it a secret up to now．Aren't you happy，Father？I'm going to live for ever and ever and ever！’
　　Mr Craven put his hands on the boy's shoulders．For a moment he could not speak．‘Take me into the garden，my boy，’he said at last，‘and tell me all about it．’
　　And in the secret garden，where the roses were at their best，and the butterflies were flying from flower to flower in the summer sunshine，they told Colin's father their story．Sometimes he laughed and sometimes he cried，but most of the time he just looked，unbelieving，into the handsome face of the son that he had almost forgotten．
　　‘Now，’said Colin at the end，‘it isn't a secret any more．I'll never use the wheelchair again．I'm going to walk back with you，Fatherto the house．’
　　And so，that afternoon，Mrs Medlock，Martha，and the other servants had the greatest shock of their lives．Through the gardens towards the house came Mr Craven，looking happier than they had ever seen him．And by his side，with his shoulders straight，his head held high and a smile on his lips，walked young Colin！




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Prisoner of Zenda by Anthony Hope





■ 1 The Rassendylls-and the Elphbergs
　　'I wonder when you're going to do something useful， Rudolf，'my brother's wife said．She looked at me crossly over the breakfast table．
　　'But why should I do anything，Rose？'I answered，calmly eating my egg．'I've got nearly enough money for the things I want，and my brother，Robert，is a lord-Lord Burlesdon．I'm very happy．'
　　'You're twenty-nine，and you've done nothing except…'
　　'Play about？It's true．We Rassendylls are a rich and famous family，and we don't need to do anything．'
　　This made Rose angry．'Rich and famous families usually behave worse than less important families，'she said．
　　When I heard this，I touched my dark red hair．I knew what she meant．
　　'I'm so pleased that Robert's hair is black！'she cried．
　　Just then my brother，Robert，came in．When he looked at Rose，he could see that there was something wrong．
　　'What's the matter，my dear？'he said．
　　'Oh，she's angry because I never do anything useful，and because I've got red hair，'I said．
　　'Well，I know he can't do much about his hair，or his nose…'Rose began．
　　'No，the nose and the hair are in the family，'my brother agreed．'And Rudolf has both of them．'
　　In the room there were many family pictures，and one of them was of a very beautiful woman，Lady Amelia，who lived a hundred and fifty years ago．I stood up and turned to look at it．
　　'If you took that picture away，Robert，'Rose cried，'we could forget all about it．'
　　'Oh，but I don't want to forget about it，'I replied．'I like being an Elphberg．'
　　But perhaps I should stop for a moment and explain why Rose was angry about my nose and my hair and why I，a Rassendyll，said I was an Elphberg．After all，the Elphbergs are the royal family of Ruritania，and have been for hundreds of years．
　　The story is told in a book about the Rassendyll family history．
　　In the year 1733 Prince Rudolf of Ruritania came to England on a visit and he stayed for several months．Like many of the Elphberg royal family，he had blue eyes，an unusually long straight nose and a lot of dark red hair．He was also tall and very good-looking．
　　During his stay here，he became friendly with Lady Amelia，the beautiful wife of Lord Burlesdon．They became very good friends indeed，which，naturally，did not please Lord Burlesdon．So，one cold wet morning，the two men fought．The Prince was hurt in the fight，but got better and was hurried back to Ruritania．There he married and became King Rudolf the Third．But Lord Burlesdon fell ill，and six months later he died．Two months after that，Lady Amelia had a baby son，who became the next Lord Burlesdon and the head of the Rassendyll family．The boy grew into a man with blue eyes，a long straight nose，and dark red hair．
　　These things can happen in the best of families，and among the many pictures of the Rassendylls at home，you can see that five or six of them have the same blue eyes，the same nose，and the same red hair．
　　So，because my hair was red and I had the Elphberg nose，Rose worried about me．In the end，to please her，I promised to get a job in six months time．This gave me six free months to enjoy myself first．
　　And an idea came to me．I would visit Ruritania．None of my family had ever been there．They preferred to forget all about the Lady Amelia．But I saw in the newspaper that，in three weeks，the new young King，Rudolf the Fifth，would have his coronation．It would be an interesting time to visit the country．
　　I knew my family would not like my going，so I told them I was going walking in Austria．






■ 2 The colour of men's hair
　　On the way to Ruritania I decided to spend a night in Paris with a friend．The next morning he came with me to the station，and as we waited for the train，we watched the crowds．We noticed a tall，dark，very fashionable lady，and my friend told me who she was．
　　'That's Madame Antoinette de Mauban．She's travelling on the same train as you，but don't fall in love with her．'
　　'Why not？'I asked，amused．
　　'Ah，'said my friend，'all Paris knows that she's in love with Duke Michael of Strelsau．And he，as you know，is the half-brother of the new King of Ruritania．Although he's only the second son and will never be king himself，he's still an important man and very popular，I hear，with many Ruritanians．The lovely Madame Antoinette won't look twice at you，Rudolf．'
　　I laughed，but he had woken my interest in the lady．I did not speak to her during the journey，and when we arrived in Ruritania，I left the train at Zenda，a small town outside the capital．But I noticed that Madame de Mauban went on to Strelsau，the capital．
　　I was welcomed very kindly at my hotel．It belonged to a fat old lady and her pretty daughter．From them I learned that the coronation was to be on the day after next，and not in three weeks．
　　The old lady was more interested in Duke Michael of Strelsau than in the new King．The Castle of Zenda and all the land around it belonged to the Duke，but the old lady said，'It's not enough．Duke Michael should be king．He spends all his time with us．Every Ruritanian knows him，but we never see the new King．'
　　But the daughter cried，'Oh no，I hate Black Michael．I want a red Elphberg-and the King，our friend Johann says，is very red．Johann works for the Duke and he's seen the King．In fact，the King's staying just outside Zenda now，'she added．'He's resting at the Duke's house in the forest before going on to Strelsau on Wednesday for his coronation．The Duke's already in Strelsau，getting everything ready．'
　　'They're friends？'I asked．
　　'Friends who want the same place and the same wife，'the pretty girl replied．'The Duke wants to marry his cousin，Princess Flavia，but people say she's going to be King Rudolf's wife and the Queen．'
　　Just then their friend，Johann，entered the room．
　　'We have a visitor，Johann，'the girl's mother said，and Johann turned towards me．But when he saw me，he stepped back，with a look of wonder on his face．
　　'What's the matter，Johann？'the daughter asked．
　　'Good evening，sir，'Johann said，still staring at me．He did not seem to like what he saw．
　　The girl began to laugh．'It's the colour of your hair，sir，'she explained．'We don't often see that colour here． It's the Elphberg red-not Johann's favourite colour．'
　　* * *
　　The next day I decided to walk through the forest for a few miles and take the train to Strelsau from a little station along the road．I sent my luggage on by train and after lunch，I started out on foot．First，I wanted to see the Castle of Zenda and in half an hour I had climbed the hill to it．There were two buildings the old one，with a moat around it，and the new，modern building．Duke Michael could have friends to stay with him in the new castle，but he could go into the old castle when he wanted to be alone．The water in the moat was deep，and if he pulled up the drawbridge over the moat，no one could get to him．
　　I stayed there for some time and looked at the castle，and then I walked on through the forest for about an hour．It was beautiful and I sat down to enjoy it．Before I knew what had happened，I was asleep．
　　Suddenly I heard a voice say，'Good heavens！He looks just like the King！'
　　When I opened my eyes，there were two men in front of me．One of them came nearer．
　　'May I ask your name？'he said．
　　'Well，why don't you tell me your names first？'I replied．
　　The younger of the two men said，'This is Captain Sapt，and I am Fritz von Tarlenheim．We work for the King of Ruritania．
　　'And I am Rudolf Rassendyll，'I answered，'a traveller from England．My brother is Lord Burlesdon．'
　　'Of course！The hair！'Sapt cried．'You know the story，Fritz？'
　　Just then a voice called out from the trees behind us．'Fritz！Fritz！Where are you，man？'
　　'It's the King！'Fritz said，and Sapt laughed．
　　Then a young man jumped out from behind a tree．I gave a cry，and when he saw me，he stepped back in sudden surprise．The King of Ruritania looked just like Rudolf Rassendyll，and Rudolf Rassendyll looked just like the King！
　　For a moment the King said nothing，but then he asked，'Captain…Fritz…who is this？'
　　Sapt went to the King and spoke quietly in his ear．The King's surprise changed slowly to an amused smile，then suddenly he began to laugh loudly．'Well met，cousin！'he cried．'Where are you travelling to？'
　　'To Strelsau，sirto the coronation．'
　　The King looked at his friends，and，for a moment，he was serious．But then he began to laugh again．'Wait until brother Michael sees that there are two of us！'he cried．
　　'Perhaps it isn't a very good idea for Mr Rassendyll to go to Strelsau，'Fritz said，worried，and Sapt agreed with him．
　　'Oh，we'll think about the coronation tomorrow，the Kingsaid．'Tonight we'll enjoy ourselves．Come，cousin！'
　　We returned to the Duke's house in the forest，where we had an excellent dinner．The King called loudly for wine，and Captain Sapt and Fritz seemed worried．Clearly，the King liked his wine a little too much．
　　'Remember the coronation is tomorrow，'warned old Sapt．
　　But the King was only interested in enjoying himself tonight，so we all drank and talked，and drank again．At last the King put down his glass and said，'I've drunk enough．'
　　As he said that，old Josef，the King's servant，came in．He put some very special old wine on the table in front of the King and said，'Duke Michael offers you this wine and asks you to drink it for love of him．'
　　'Well done，Black Michael！'the King cried．'Well，I'm not afraid to drink your wine！'
　　And he drank every drop of wine in the bottle，himself．Then his head fell forward on to the table，and soon afterwards I too remembered no more of that wild evening．






■ 3 The King goes to his coronation
　　I do not know how long I was asleep，but when I woken I was cold and wet．Sapt and Fritz stood there looking at me．'We had to wake you，'Sapt said．'Gold water was the only way．'
　　Fritz took my arm and turned me round．'Look！'he said．
　　The King was on the floor，and when Sapt pushed him with his foot，he did not move．
　　'We've been trying to wake him for half an hour，'said Fritz．'But he's sleeping like a dead man．'
　　The three of us looked at each other．
　　'Was there something in that last bottle of wine？'I asked．
　　'I don't know，'Sapt said，'but if be doesn't get to his coronation today，there'll never be a coronation for him．All Ruritania is waiting for him in Strelsau and Black Michael with half the army，too．We can't tell them that the King is too drunk to go to his own coronation！'
　　'You can say he's ill，' I said．
　　'Ill！'Sapt laughed angrily．'Everybody will know what that means．He's been“ill”too many times before．'
　　'Tell me，do you think somebody put something in his wine？'I asked．
　　'It was Black Michael！'Fritz replied．'We all know he wants to be King himself．'
　　For a moment or two we were all silent，and then Sapt looked at me，'You must go to Strelsau and take his place！'
　　I stared at him．'You're crazy，man！How can I do that？The King…'
　　'It's dangerous，I know，'said Sapt．'But it's our only chance．If you don't go，Black Michael will be King and the real king will be dead or a prisoner．'
　　How could I refuse？It took me two minutes to decide．
　　'I'll go！'I said．
　　'Well done，boy！'cried Sapt．He went on quickly and quietly．'After the coronation they'll take us to the palace for the night．When we're alone，you and I will leave and ride back here to fetch the King．He'll be all right by then．I'll take him back to Strelsau and you must get out of the country as fast as you can．'
　　'But what about the soldiers？Fritz asked．'They're Duke Michael's men，and they're coming to take the King back to Strelsau for the coronation．'
　　'We'll go before the soldiers get here，'Sapt said，'and we'll hide the King．'
　　He picked up the King in his arms and we opened the door．An old woman，Johann's mother，was standing there．She turned，without a word，and went back to the kitchen．
　　'Did she hear？'Fritz asked．
　　Don't worry．I'll make sure she can't talk，'Sapt said，and he carried the King away．
　　When he returned，he told us that he had locked the old woman in a room underground．The King and Josef were hidden in another room underground．'Josef will take care of the King and tell him everything when he wakes up．Come，'he went on，'there's no time to lose．It's already six o'clock．'
　　Soon I was dressed in the King's clothes，the horses were ready and we were on our way．As we rode through the forest，Sapt told me everything that he could about my life，my family，my friends，and the things I liked or did not like．He told me what to do when we got there，and how to speak to different people．He was a wonderful teacher，and I listened hard．One mistake could mean death for all three of us．
　　It was eight o'clock when we arrived at the station and got on the train，and by halfpast nine we were in Strelsau．
　　And when King Rudolf the Fifth stepped out of the train，the people shouted，'God save the King！'
　　Old Sapt smiled，'God save them both，'he said quietly．'I only hope we are all alive tonight！'






■ 4 My adventures begin
　　As we made our way to the palace，I began to feel that I really was the King of Ruritania，with Marshal Strakencz，the head of the army，on my right and old Sapt on my left．I could see that Strelsau was really two towns the Old Town and the New Town．The people of the Old Town，who were poor，wanted Duke Michael to be their King，but the people of the New Town wanted King Rudolf．We went through the New Town first，and it was bright and colourful，with the ladies'dresses and the red roses of the Elphbergs．The people shouted loudly for their King as we passed through the streets．But when we came to the Old Town，the Marshal and Sapt moved nearer to my horse，and I could see that they were afraid for me．
　　'Stay back！'I called．'I'll show my people that I'm not afraid of them．'Some of the crowd were pleased when they heard this，but most of them watched me in silence．
　　Finally，we reached the great church of Strelsau．I remember very little of the coronation-only two faces．One was a beauti ful girl with wonderful red hair，the Princess Flavia．The other was the face of a man with black hair and dark，deep eyes-Black Michael．When he saw me，his face turned white．Clearly，he was surprised and deeply unhappy to see me．
　　The coronation seemed to last for hours，but I managed to say and do all the right things．At last it was over，and I was now the King of Ruritania！As Princess Flavia and I drove back to the palace in an open car，one man in the crowd called out，'When's the wedding？'
　　The Princess's face went a little pink when she heard this．After a while she said，'You seem different today，Rudolf．Quieter and more serious．Are you going to become a more sensible person now？'
　　The Princess，I realized，did not think very highly of the King．As for me，I thought the King was a very lucky man．
　　'If that will please you，I'll try to do it，'I said softly．
　　The Princess's face went pink again．Then she said，'You must be careful of Michael．You know．'
　　'I know，'I said，'that he wants what I have，and also what I hope to have one day．'As I spoke，I looked at her，and she smiled at me prettily．
　　'I wonder what the King's doing now，'I thought．
　　* * *
　　The royal dinner went on for a long time，but at last Fritz，Sapt，and I were alone in the King's dressing-room．
　　'You did well，'Fritz said，'but，Rassendyll，be careful！Black Michael looked blacker than ever today-because you and the Princess had so much to say to each other．'
　　'She's very beautiful，'I replied．
　　'Come on，'Sapt cried．'There's no time for that now．We must leave for Zenda at once，to find the King！If we're caught，we'll all be killed！Black Michael has had a letter from Zenda，so perhaps he knows already．Don't unlock the door，Fritz，while we're away，or you'll be a dead man．Say the King must be left alone to rest．Now，come on．The horses are ready．'
　　Fritz and I shook hands，then I covered my red hair and most of my face．Sapt and I left the room by a secret door，and we found ourselves outside，at the back of the palace gardens．A man was waiting there with two horses．
　　Soon we left the town behind us，and we were out in the country．We rode like the wind and by ten o'clock had come to the edge of the forest of Zenda．
　　Suddenly Sapt stopped．'Listen！'he said quietly．'Horses behind us！Quick！Get down！The castle's to the left，'he continued．'Our road's to the right．'
　　We hid in the thick trees，and we waited and watched．The men came nearer．It was Black Michael and another man．When they came to the two roads，they stopped．
　　'Which way？'the Duke asked．
　　'To the castle！'the other man cried'They'll know there what's been happening．'
　　The Duke waited for a moment．'To Zenda then！'he cried finally，and the two men took the road to the left．
　　We waited for ten more minutes，and then we hurried on．
　　When we arrived at the house in the forest，we ran to the underground rooms．The one where Sapt had locked up the old woman was empty．She had escaped！The other room was locked．Sapt's face was white with fear．Between us，we broke down the door and ran in．I found a light and looked round the room．The servant Josef was on the floor-dead！I held up the light and looked in every corner of the room．
　　'The King isn't herer！'I said．






■ 5 His Majesty returns to Strelsau
　　It was one o'clock in the morning．For a few minutes we said nothing．Then Sapt cried，'The Duke's men have taken the King prisoner！'
　　Then we must get back and wake everyone in Strelsau！'I cried．'We must catch Black Michael before he kills the King．'
　　'Who knows where the King is now？'Sapt answered．Then suddenly he began to laugh．'But we've given Black Michael a problem，'he said．'Yes，my boy．We'll go back to Strelsau．The King will be in his palace in Strelsau again tomorrow．'
　　'No！'I cried．
　　'Yes！'Sapt answered．'It's the only way to help him．Go back and take his place for him．'
　　'But the Duke knows…'
　　'Yes，but he can't speak，can he？What can he say？“This man isn't the King because I've taken the real King prisoner and murdered his servant．”Can he say that？'
　　But people will soon realize l'm not the real King，'I said．
　　'Perhaps，perhaps not，'said Sapt．'But we must have a King in Strelsau，or Michael will ride in tomorrow as the new King！Listen，boy，if you don't go back to Strelsau，they'll kill the King．And if you do go back，they can't kill the King．Because if they kill him，how can they ever say that you're not the real King？Don't you see？'he cried．'It's a dangerous game，but it gives us a chance of winning．'
　　It was a wild，hopeless plan，but I was young．I would never have the chance of an adventure like this again．'Sapt，I'll try it，'I said．
　　'Good for you！'Sapt cried．'But we must hurry！Look！'
　　He pulled me over to the door The moon was low now，and there was not much light，but I could just see a small group of men on horses．They were Black Michael's men，probably coming to take the dead body of Josef away．
　　'We can't let them go without doing something，'I said，thinking of poor Josef．
　　'Right，'Sapt agreed．We ran out of the back of the house，and quickly got onto our horses．Silently，we waited in the darkness，and then we galloped round the house and straight into the group of men．Between us，we killed three of them，but a bullet hit my finger and it began to bleed．
　　We rode hard all night and it was about eight or nine o'clock in the morning when we reached Strelsau．Luckily，the streets were still empty．We arrived at the palace，went in，and got to the dressing-room．When we opened the door，Fritz was asleep，but he woke immediately．When he saw me，he fell to the ground and cried，'Thank God，Your Majesty！You're safe！'
　　'Well done，boy！'Sapt shouted．'We'll do it！'
　　Fritz stood up．He looked at me，up and down，down and up．Then he took a step backwards．'Where's the King？'he cried．
　　'Be quiet，'Sapt warned him．'Someone will hear！'
　　Fritz's face was white now．'Is the King dead？'he asked quietly．
　　'Please God，no，'I answered．'But Black Michael has him．'
　　* * *
　　The next day was a long one for me．Sapt talked to me for three hours about what I must do and what I must say，what I liked and what I didn't like．Then I had to do some of the King's business，but，because of my damaged finger，I did not have to write my name on any papers．
　　When，at last，I was alone with Sapt and Fritz，we began to talk about Black Michael．Fritz told me that Black Michael had six very dangerous men among his servants-three Ruritanians，a Belgian，a Frenchman，and an Englishman．They did anything that the Duke ordered，and did not stop at murder．Three of them-the foreigners，Fritz had heard were in Strelsau now with Duke Michael．
　　Sapt banged the table with his hand in excitement．'Then the King must be alive！Michael's brought the foreigners with him，and left the three Ruritanians to hold the King prisoner．Usually，the Six，as they're called，go everywhere with him．'
　　Fritz wanted to do something immediately about Black Michael and his men，but Sapt and I realized that we could not do anything openly．
　　'We'll play a waiting game，and let Michael make the first move，'I said．
　　And so I continued as King of Ruritania．In order to help the real King，I tried to make myself popular with the people．I went riding through the streets，smiling and talking to everybody．I also went to visit the Princess Flavia．The King's officials had told me that the Princess was very popular，and the people hoped that she would become my wife．
　　It was easy for me to pretend to be in love with the Princess．Too easy．Those beautiful eyes and that lovely smile were stealing my heart．Here was my greatest danger！I was pretending to be another man，but losing my own heart．On my first visit，we sat together for a long time，talking of this and that．When I got up to leave，Princess Flavia said，'Rudolf，you will be careful，won't you？You have enemies，as I'm sure you know，and your life is very important to…Ruritania．'
　　'Only to Ruritania？'I asked softly．
　　'And to your loving cousin，'she answered quietly．
　　I could not speak．I took her hand in mine．Then，with a heavy heart，I left．
　　Of course，I made many mistakes in my new life as King．But I managed to talk my way out of them，with luck and with help from Fritz and Sapt．It was like living on a knife edge．Once I met my brother Michael in the Princess's house．We smiled and talked politely，but I could see the anger in his black eyes．






■ 6 An adventure with a teatable
　　One day Sapt brought me some news he had found out where the King was．Duke Michael was holding him prisoner somewhere in the Castle of Zenda．
　　Sapt also brought me a letter．It was in a woman's handwriting．
　　'To know what you most wish to know，'the letter began，'meet me tonight in the garden of the big house in New Avenue．Come at midnight，and come alone．'
　　There was another note on the back of the letter．'Ask yourself which woman does not want Black Michael to marry the Princess．A．de M．'
　　'Antoinette de Mauban！'I cried．'She wants to marry the Duke．'
　　'That's true，'Sapt said．'But you won't go，of course．They'll kill you！Duke Michael made her write this letter！'
　　'I must，'I replied．'Every day we play this game there's more danger．I could make a mistake at any time，and，if I do，we'll all die．Don't you see？I have to go tonight．We can't go on much longer．'
　　'Then I'm coming too，'said Sapt．
　　So，at half-past eleven that night，Sapt and I rode out to the house in New Avenue．We left Fritz to watch my room in the palace．The night was dark，so I took a lamp．I also had my revolver and a knife．
　　We soon reached the house，and came to a gate in the wall．I got off my horse．
　　'I'll wait here，'said Sapt．'If I hear anything，I'll-'
　　'Stay where you are！'I answered quickly．'It's the King's only chance．They mustn't kill you too！'
　　'You're right，'said Sapt．'Good luck！'
　　Silently，I opened the gate and went into the garden．In front of me I could see the dark shape of a summer-house and I moved towards it．Without a sound，I went up the steps，pushed open the door and went in．A woman hurried over to me and took me by the hand．I turned my lamp on her．She was beautiful．
　　'Close the door！'she said．'We must be quick，Mr Rassendyll！Michael made me write the letter-three men are coming to kill you-three of the Six！They'll tell everyone that Sapt and Fritz von Tarlenheim murdered you．Then Michael will make himself King and marry the Princess．'Antoinette's beautiful eyes were sad as she added softly，'I can't let him marry her．I love him！'
　　'But the king，'I said．'I know he's in the Castle of Zenda -but where？'
　　'Go across the drawbridge and you come to a heavy door …Listen！What's that？They're coming！They're too soon！Put out your lamp！'she cried，her eyes filled with fear．'Quickly！You must go．There's a ladder at the end of the garden，against the wall！'
　　But it was too late．The three men were already outside．There was a small hole in the door，and I put my eye to it．My hand was on my revolver．It was no good！There were three of them．I could kill one perhaps，but then…
　　A voice came from outside．'Mr Rassendyll…'It was the Englishman．'We only want to talk to you．Open the door．'
　　'We can talk through the door，'I replied．I looked through the hole again and saw that they were on the top step．When I opened the door，they would run at me．
　　'We'll let you go if you leave the country and we'll give you fifty thousand English pounds，'continued Detchard，the Englishman．
　　'Give me a minute to think，'I answered．
　　Wildly，I looked around the summer-house and saw a metal garden table and some chairs．I picked up the table and held it in front of me，by the legs．Then I went to the back of the room and waited．
　　'All right，I agree，'I called．'Open the door！'
　　I heard them arguing with each other，and then Detchard said to the Belgian，'Why，Bersonin，are you afraid of one man？'
　　A second later the door opened．
　　De Gautet，the Frenchman，was with the other two，and the three men were standing there with their revolvers ready．With a shout，I ran at them as hard as I could．They tried to shoot me，but the bullets hit the table．The next second the table knocked them to the ground and we all fell on top of each other．Quickly，I picked myself up and ran for my life through the trees．I could hear them coming after me．Was Antoinette right？Was there really a ladder by the wall？I reached the end of the garden．The ladder was there！In a minute I was up it and over the wall．
　　Sapt was waiting with the horses and seconds later we were on our way home．And，as we rode，we laughed because I had fought Duke Michael's dangerous men-with a tea-table！






■ 7 For love of the King
　　Every day I was sent a secret report by the Chief of Police，and the next afternoon I was playing cards with Fritz when Sapt brought it in．We learned that Duke Michael and the Three had left Strelsau，and that Antoinette de Mauban had also left．Clearly，they had gone to Zenda．The report also said that the people were unhappy because the King had not yet asked Princess Flavia to marry him．
　　'Yes，'said Fritz．'It's true．I've heard that the Princess loves the King and she's very sad…'
　　'Well，'Sapt informed us，'I've arranged a dance at the royal palace this evening，for the Princess．'
　　'Why wasn't I told？'I asked angrily．
　　But Sapt continued，'Everything is arranged．And tonight you must ask the Princess to marry you．'
　　'No！I'll do nothing to hurt her！'I cried．
　　'All right，my boy，'Sapt smiled gently．'Just say something nice to her，then．Remember，she thinks you're the King and we don't want her to be angry with him，do we？'
　　I understood，of course．If the King was saved，then Flavia must marry him．If he was not saved，then Sapt would ask me to stay and marry the Princess．Duke Michael must not be King．
　　The dance was wonderful．Flavia was beautiful and I dancedwith her again and again．Everyone could feel our happiness．I forgot about the crowd of rich，colourful people who were watching us．I had eyes only for my beautiful Flavia．
　　When supper had finished，Fritz touched me on the shoulder．I stood up，took Flavia's hand and led her into a little room．They brought coffee to us and then the door was closed quietly．The Princess and I were alone．
　　The windows of the little room opened onto the garden．The night was fine and the room was filled with the sweet smell of the flowers outside．Flavia sat down and I stood opposite her．I was fighting with myself…But then she looked at me-and I was lost！I forgot the King，I forgot who I was，I forgot everything！I fell to my knees，took her gently in my arms and kissed her．
　　Suddenly she pushed me away．'Is it true？Do you really love me？'she cried．'Or is it because you're the King and you must marry me？'
　　'No！'I answered quietly．'I love you more than my life！'
　　Flavia smiled．'Oh，why do I love you now？'she said softly．'I didn't love you before，but I do now．'
　　How happy I was！ It was not the King she loved．It was me -it was Rudolf Rassendyll！ But as I looked into her lovely face，I knew I could not live with the lie．How could I pretend to be the King any longer？
　　'There's something I must tell you…'I began in a low voice．
　　'Your Majesty，'said a voice from the garden．'People are waiting to say goodbye．'
　　It was Sapt．He had heard me talking to the Princess．
　　'We'll come，'I replied coldly．
　　But Flavia，her eyes full of her love for me， held out her hand to Sapt as he came into the room．He took it and said softly and sadly，'God save your Royal Highness．'And then he added，'But before all comes the King-God save the King！'
　　When Sapt told the people that Princess Flavia had accepted the King as her future husband，they were wild with happiness．
　　'You know，Sapt，'I said sadly，'I could marry the Princess and let my people kill Duke Michael-and the King．'
　　'I know，'Sapt replied quietly．
　　'So we must go to Zenda and bring the King home atonce！'I said．
　　Sapt put his hand on my shoulder．'You're the finest Elph-berg of them all，'he said with feeling．
　　* * *
　　Before we left Strelsau，I saw the Marshal and asked him to stay near Flavia，to take care of her and to keep her safe from Duke Michael．Then I went to say goodbye to her．At first she was cold with me．She did not understand why I wanted to leave her．But her anger changed to fear when I told her that I was going after Duke Michael．
　　'Oh，Rudolf，be careful！'she cried．'He's a dangerous man！Please come back safely to me．'
　　'Duke Michael can never keep me away from you，'I promised．But in my heart I knew that another man could．






■ 8 Back to Zenda
　　The next day Sapt，Fritz，and I left Strelsau to go to Tarlenheim House．This fine modern house belonged to Fritz's uncle and was near the Castle of Zenda．We had ten brave young men with us．Sapt had told them that a friend of the King's was a prisoner in the Castle of Zenda and that the King needed their help．
　　Michael，of course，knew of my arrival．But I was sure he did not understand why I had come．He would think that my plan was to kill him and the King-and marry the Princess myself．So，I had not been in the house an hour when he sent three of the Six to me．These were not the three men who had tried to kill me．This time he sent the three Ruritanians-Lauengram，Krafstein and young Rupert of Hentzau．
　　'Duke Michael is very sorry that he can't welcome you himself，'explained Rupert of Hentzau．'But，sadly，he's ill at the moment．'
　　'I hope that my dear brother will soon be better，'I replied with a smile．
　　Rupert threw back his head，shook his black hair and laughed．He was a good-looking young man．People said he had broken many hearts already．
　　'Oh，I'm sure he will！'he answered．
　　* * *
　　That evening，instead of having dinner at the house，Fritz and I went to the little hotel in the town of Zenda where I had stayed before．
　　'Ask for a room where we can dine alone，'I said to Fritz．'And ask the pretty girl to bring our food．'
　　I covered my face and the girl came and put the wine down on the table．When she turned to go，she looked at me and I let her see my face．
　　'The King！'she cried．'You were the King！Oh，I'm sorry，sir！I'm sorry！The things that we said！'
　　'Forget that now，' I answered．'You can help me．Bring our dinner，but tell no one that the King is here．'
　　She came back in a few minutes，looking very serious．
　　'How's your friend Johann？' I began．
　　She looked surprised．'Oh，we don't see him very often now，'she answered．'He's very busy at the castle．''But you could get Johann to meet you tomorrow night，couldn't you？At ten o'clock，perhaps，on the road out of Zen-da．'
　　'Yes，sir…Yon're not going to hurt him？'
　　'Not if he does what I say．Go now，and say nothing about this．'
　　After dinner，we left to go back to Tarlenheim House．We had almost reached it when we saw Sapt running to meet us．'Have you seen them？'he cried．
　　'Who？'I asked．
　　'Duke Michael's men．Don't go out unless you have six men or more with you！'he said．'You know Bernenstein， one of your men？'
　　'Of course，'I answered．'A good，strong man，about as tall as me．'
　　'Well，they tried to kill him．He's upstairs now with a bullet in his arm．He was walking in the woods and he saw three men．Suddenly，they started shooting at him，so he began to run．He was lucky．They were afraid to come too near the house，so he escaped．But it was you they wanted to kill！'
　　'Sapt，'I said，'I promise I'll do one thing for Ruritania be fore I leave it．'
　　'What's that？'asked Sapt．
　　'I'll kill every one of the Six．Ruritania will be a better place without them！'






■ 9 News of the prisoner
　　The next morning I was sitting in the garden in the sun when suddenly I saw young Rupert of Hentzau on horseback coming through the trees towards me．He was not afraid of my men，but asked to speak with me alone．He said he had a message for me from the Duke of Strelsau．I asked my friends to move away，and Rupert came and sat down near me．
　　'Rassendyll，'he began，'the Duke…．'
　　'Don't you know how to speak to the King？'I asked．
　　'Why pretend with me？'
　　'Because it isn't finished yet．'
　　'well，I'm here because I want to help you…'
　　'Then give me the message．What does the Duke want？'I asked．
　　'He wants you to leave．He'll take you safely out of the country and give you a hundred thousand pounds．'
　　'I refuse，'I replied immediately．
　　Rupert laughed．'I knew it！'he cried．'Duke Michael doesn't understand men like us！… You must die，then，'he added carelessly．
　　'Yes，'I answered．'But you won't be alive to see me die！'I laughed．'How's your prisoner？'I added．
　　'Alive，'he replied．'How's the pretty Princess？'
　　I took a step towards him．'Go now，before I kill you，'I shouted angrily．
　　Rupert turned， but suddenly he came back．He put out his right hand．'Shake hands！'he called．
　　Of course，he knew what I would do．I put my hands behind my back．Quickly，his left hand moved towards me．In it he held a dagger and it was coming straight at my heart！I jumped to one side，and the dagger went deep into my shoulder．Before my friends could do anything，Rupert of Hentzau was on his horse and galloping through the trees．I heard my men going after him with their guns and then everything went black．
　　When I awoke it was dark，and Fritz was at my bedside．He told me that I was not badly hurt，and that the plan to catch Johann had been successful．
　　'He seems pleased to be here，'Fritz said．'I think he's afraid of Duke Michael．'
　　Later Sapt brought Johann up to see me．At first Johann was afraid to speak，but then he began to talk．We asked him many questions，and finally Johann gave us the information we wanted．
　　In the Castle of Zenda，near the drawbridge and below the ground，there were two small rooms，cut out of the rock itself．In the first of these rooms there were always three of the Six．At the back of this room there was a door which led into the second room．The King was in the second room．
　　'If someone tries to get into the first room，two of the tnree men will fight，but Rupert of Hentzau or Detchard will run into the second room and kill the King，'Johann said．'There's a small window in the second room with a large pipe going down into the moat outside，'he went on．'You can get a man inside it，and they'll tie a heavy stone to the King's body and push it down the pipe．The body will go down and disappear under the water，and the murderers will then go down the pipe themselves，and swim across the moat．'
　　'And if I bring an army to the castle？'I asked．
　　'Duke Michael will still murder the King，'replied Johann．'He won't fight．He'll kill the King and push his body down the pipe．And he'll put one of the Six in the prison．He'll say the man had done something to make him angry．That will stop the stories about a prisoner in Zenda．'Johann stopped for a minute，but then he added，'If they know I've told you this，they'll kill me．They're all bad，but Rupert of Hentzau is the worst．Don't let them kill me…'
　　'All right，'I said．'But if anyone asks you who the prisoner of Zenda is，don't tell him． If you do，I'll kill you myself！'
　　Johann left the room and I looked at Sapt．
　　'It doesn't matter what plan we make，'I said．'The King will be dead before we can get to him！'
　　Sapt shook his grey head angrily．'You'll still be King of Ruritania in a year's time．'
　　'Perhaps one of the Duke's men will turn against him…'I began．
　　'Impossible，'replied Sapt．
　　'Then we need the help of God，'I said．






■ 10 A night outside the castle
　　I wanted Duke Michael to think that I was still very ill，so we told the newspapers that the King had had a very serious accident．When Princess Flavia read this，she was very worried and she decided to come and see me．The Marshal could not stop her，and，although I was afraid for her，I was ex cited at the thought of seeing her again．We spent two wonderfully happy days together．
　　We had sent Johann back to the Castle of Zenda and suddenly we had a message from him．The real King was very ill．
　　'I must save him，'I said to myself．'I love Flavia more each day．I can't go on like this much longer．'
　　I talked to Sapt．He agreed，so we made our plans．
　　* * *
　　Late the next night，Sapt，Fritz，and I，with six more men，rode out towards the Castle of Zenda．Sapt was carrying a long rope and I had a short，thick stick and a long knife．
　　The night was dark，and it was wet and windy．We stayed away from the town and we met no one．When we came to the moat，we stopped near some trees and the six men hid there with the horses．Then Sapt tied the rope round one of the trees near the water．I pulled off my boots，put the stick between my teeth and gently went down the rope into the water．I was going to take a look at the pipe．
　　It had been warm and bright that day，and the water was not cold．Slowly and carefully I swam round the dark walls of the castle．There were lights in the new buildings，and from time to time I heard people shouting and laughing．'That must be young Rupert and his friends，'I thought．Suddenly a dark shape appeared in front of me．It was the pipe！The bottom of it was very wide and came out into the moat．And then I saw something which nearly made my heart stop．It was a boat， and in the boat there was a man！His gun was beside him，but，luckily，he was asleep．As quietly as I could，I moved closer． The man still slept．What could I do？ I had to save the King．I took out my knife and drove it through the sleeping man's heart！On the other side of the castle they were still singing．
　　I had very little time．Someone could come at any minute．I looked up at where the pipe went through the wall into the prison．There was a thin line of light at the bottom edge．I heard Detchard's voice，and then I heard the King reply．Just then the light went out，and，in the darkness，I heard the King crying．I did not call to him．I had to get away safely- and take the body of the dead watchman with me．
　　I climbed into the boat and began to go back to where my friends were．No one could hear me because the wind was strong．But from somewhere behind me，I heard a shout．Someone was calling to the watchman．I reached the side of the moat where Sapt and Fritz were waiting．Quickly，I tied the rope round the man's body and Sapt and Fritz pulled it up．Then I climbed up the rope myself．
　　'Call our men from the trees，'I said quietly．'And hurry！'
　　But just then，three men rode round from the front of the castle．Luckily，they did not see us，but they heard our six friends riding out of the trees，and with a shout they galloped towards them．
　　Seconds later we heard the sound of shots and I ran to help our men．Sapt and Fritz followed．
　　'Kill them！'cried a voice．It was Rupert of Hentzau．
　　'Too late！They've got both of us！'cried another voice．'Save yourself，Rupert！'
　　I ran on，holding my stick in my hand．Suddenly，through the darkness，I saw a horse coming towards me．I jumped at the horse's head，and saw the man's face above me．
　　'At last！'I shouted．'Rupert of Hentzau！'
　　He had only his sword，and my men were coming at him from one side，and Sapt and Fritz from the other．
　　Rupert laughed．'It's the play-actor！'he cried，and with his sword he knocked my stick from my hand．Then he turned his horse，galloped to the moat，and jumped into the water with our bullets flying round his ears．Our men tried to shoot him in the water，but it was dark，there was no moon-and we lost him．
　　We had killed two of the Six-Lauengram and Krafstein- but I was angry．Three of our brave friends were also dead， and we carried them home with a heavy heart．
　　And I did not like to hear Rupert call me a play-actor．
　　* * *
　　Of course，Michael and I could not let the people know that we were enemies．So，in the daytime it was safe to be in the town of Zenda．One day，soon after our night outside the castle，Princess Flavia and I were riding through the town when we saw a group of people dressed in black going to the church．Rupert of Hentzau was with them，and when he saw us，he turned his horse and came towards us．
　　'It's the funeral of my dear friend，Lauengram，'he said，in answer to our question．
　　'I'm sorry your friend is dead，'I said to him．
　　'And I'm sorry，too，'Flavia added，her beautiful blue eyes sad．
　　Rupert looked at her and smiled．Then he turned and rode away．Although I was angry because he had smiled at Flavia，I went after him．
　　'You fought bravely the other night，'I said，'and you're young．Help me save the King-and I'll help you．'
　　But Rupert was not interested．'No，'he answered．'But if they were both dead-the King and the Duke- then you could be King and marry your Princess，and I could be rich，and have the woman I want．'
　　'Antoinette de Mauban？'I asked carelessly，trying not to show my interest．
　　'Yes，'replied Rupert．'I hate the Duke．She loves him，not me！'Angrily，he joined the funeral group again．
　　Strangely，when we returned home there was a message for me from Antoinette herself．
　　'I helped you once．Help me now．Save me from this terrible place！Save me from these murderers！'
　　I was sorry for her，but what could I do？






■ 11 A dangerous plan
　　One day Johann came to tell us that the King was now very sick，and that Antoinette de Mauban and a doctor were looking after him．But the Duke never left Rupert of Hentzau alone with Antoinette．I understood why，after what Rupert had told me．There were often angry voices in the castle these days，Johann told us．
　　Two of the Six were now dead，but there were always two men watching the King．The other two slept in a room above and would hear them if they called．Detchard and Bersonin watched by night；Rupert of Hentzau and De Gautet by day．The Duke's rooms were on the first floor，in the new buildings of the castle，and An-toinette's room was on the same floor．But at night the Duke locked the door of her room，and pulled up the drawbridge．He kept the key himself．Johann slept near the front door of the new castle with five other men-but they had no guns．
　　We could not wait any longer．'Listen！'I said to Johann．'I'll make you rich if you do what I say．'Johann agreed．
　　'You must take this note to Madame de Mauban．' I said，'and tomorrow，at two o'clock in the morning， you must open the front door of the new castle．Tell the others that you need air，or something- and then escape．'
　　Johann was clearly afraid，but he seemed to understand．I explained my plan to Sapt and Fritz．
　　'When Johann opens the front door，'I said，'Sapt and his men will run into the castle and hold the men who are sleeping there．At the same time Antoinette will scream loudly again and again．She'll cry“Help！Help me，Michael！”And she'll shout Rupert of Hentzau's name．Duke Michael will hear and he'll run out of his room- straight into the hands of Sapt！Sapt will get the key from the Duke and let down the draw-bridge．Rupert and De Gautet will hear the noise and hurry to cross the drawbridge．I'll hide by the bridge in the moat，and when they try to cross，I'll kill them．Then we'll hurry to the room where the King is，and kill Detchard and Bersonin before they have time to kill the King．'
　　The others listened in silence．It was a very dangerous plan，and I did not really think it would work-but we had to try！
　　That evening I went to visit Flavia．She seemed very thoughtful，and as I was leaving，she placed a ring on my finger．I was wearing the King's ring，but I took off my Rassendyll family ring and gave it to her．'Wear this for me always，'I said．
　　She kissed the ring，and replied seriously，'I'll wear it until the day I die．'
　　And then I had to leave her．I had already told the Marshal that if anything happened to the King，he must take Flavia to Strelsau，tell the people that Duke Michael had killed the King -and that Flavia was their Queen．I knew this could be my last day alive．






■ 12 The prisoner and the King
　　We needed bad weather，but it was a fine，clear night．
　　At midnight Sapt，Fritz，and their men left and rode quietly through the woods towards the castle．If everything went well，they would get there at a quarter to two and wait for Johann to open the front door．If Johann did not open the door，Fritz would come round to the other side of the castle to find me．If I was not there，then I was dead-and the King，too！Sapt and his men would go back to Tarlenheim House and return with the Marshal and more men to get into the castle．
　　So，half an hour later，I，too，left Tarlenheim．I took a shorter way than Sapt and when I reached the moat，I hid my horse in the trees，tied my rope round a strong tree and let myself down into the water．Slowly，I began to swim along under the castle walls．Just after a quarter to one，I came to the pipe and waited quietly in its shadow．Light was coming from Duke Michael's window opposite me across the moat，and I could see into the room．The next window along，which Johann had said was An-toinette's room，was dark．
　　Then the Duke's window opened，and Antoinette de Mauban looked out．Behind her there was a man．Rupert of Hentzau！What was he doing in the Duke's room？ I wondered．
　　Rupert tried to put his arm round Antoinette，but she moved quickly away．At that moment，I heard the door of the room open and then the angry voice of Duke Michael．
　　'What are you doing here？' he cried．
　　'Waiting for you，sir，'Rupert replied quickly．'I couldn't leave the lady alone．'
　　'Well，now you can go to bed．Are Detchard and Bersonin watching the prisoner？'
　　'Yes，sir．'
　　A few minutes later，Rupert crossed the drawbridge and it was pulled up．The light in Duke Michael's room went out，but a light came on，and stayed on，in Antoinette's room．In the silent darkness，I waited．
　　For about ten minutes everything was quiet，but suddenly I heard a noise on my side of the moat．A dark shape appeared in the gateway to the bridge，then turned and began to climb down some hidden steps in the wall．It was Rupert of Hentzau again-with a sword！Silently，he went down into the water and swam across the moat．Then he climbed out，and I heard him unlock the door．It was clear that Rupert of Hentzau had his own secret plans for that night．
　　It was not yet time for Johann to open the front door for my friends，and I still had to wait．I climbed up to the gateway of the bridge and hid in a dark corner．Now no one could enter or leave the old castle without fighting me．I wondered what Rupert was doing now，and a few seconds later I found out．
　　There was a sudden crash，and then a woman's screams rang through the night．
　　'Help me，Michael！Rupert of Hentzau！'
　　Those were the words that I had written for Antoinette！But these were screams of real fear and soon I heard shouts and the sound of fighting from Antoinette's room．Then Rupert appeared at the window．His back was towards me，but he was fighting．'That's for you，Johann，' I heard him cry．Then，'Come on，Michael！'
　　So Johann was in there too，fighting at the Duke's side！How could he open the door for Sapt now？
　　More of the Duke's men had run to the room and the noise of the fighting grew louder．Suddenly，Rupert gave a wild laugh，and with his sword in his hand，jumped from the window into the moat below．
　　At that moment the door of the old castle opened and De Gautet appeared beside me．I jumped at him with my sword，and a second later he fell dead in the doorway without a word or a sound．
　　Wildly，I searched his body for the keys．I found them，and in a minute I was in the first room，where Bersonin and Detchard were．But there was only Bersonin in the room．Before he had time to realize that I was there，I had killed him．Detchard had run into the King's room and locked the door behind him．I ran at it to break it down．But would I be in time？Was the King already dead？
　　The King was standing helplessly by the wall．But the doctor was also in the room and the brave little man had thrown himself at Detchard．He gave his life for the King，because，as I entered，Detchard pulled himself free and drove his sword into the doctor's side．Then，with an angry shout，Detchard turned to me．
　　We fought long and hard．Detchard was an excellent swords-man，and I was growing tired．He drove me back against the wall，gave me a deep cut in the arm，and began to smile．In a second he would kill me．
　　Suddenly，the King realized who I was．
　　'Cousin Rudolf！'he cried．Then he picked up a chair and threw it at Detchard's legs．The Englishman，jumping to one side，turned his sword against the King，and with a cry the King fell to the ground．Detchard moved towards me again，stepped in the doctor's blood on the floor-and fell to the ground himself．I had him！A second later his body lay across the dead doctor．
　　But was the King dead？I had no time to find out，because just then I heard the noise of the drawbridge coming down．And that wild-cat Rupert of Hentzau was still alive．The King must wait for help while I fought his enemies．I ran out of the room and up the steps towards the drawbridge．And then I heard the sound of laughter-Rupert of Hentzau was laughing！
　　He was standing alone in the middle of the bridge．In the gateway on the far side stood a group of the Duke's men．They seemed too frightened to move．
　　'Come out，Michael，you dog！' Rupert shouted．
　　But a woman's wild cry answered him．'He's dead！He's dead！'
　　The men in the gateway moved to one side and a woman came forward．Her face was as white as her long dress，and her dark hair lay over her shoulders．In her hand she held a gun． The shot rang out，but she missed．Rupert laughed．Again An-toinette de Mauban faced him，her gun ready．But，before she could shoot，Rupert jumped over the side of the bridge， and down into the moat below．
　　At that moment I heard the sound of running feet inside the new castle- and the welcome voice of my old friend，Captain Sapt！Then I knew that the King was safe and needed me no more．I ran out on to the bridge and jumped down into the moat．I had business to finish with Rupert of Hentzau．
　　* * *
　　I swam hard and caught up with him round the corner of the old castle．He had found my rope，climbed out of the moat， and was already running towards the trees where I had left my horse．
　　I ran after him as fast as I could．He turned and saw me，and called out，laughing，'Why，it's the play-actor！'But then，with a cry of surprise，he found my horse，and in a minute he was on its back．
　　'Get down！'I shouted．'Stand and fight，like a man！'
　　He turned，waiting for me，and I ran at him with my sword．For a few minutes we fought wildly．Blood ran from his face where I had cut it，but I had fought too many fights that night．He would surely kill me now．
　　I was saved by Fritz，who came galloping round the castle to find me．When Rupert saw him coming，he knew he had no chance．
　　'Goodbye，Rudolf Rassendyll！'he called．'We'll meet again！'
　　And he rode away into the forest，laughing and singing…and still alive．
　　I fell to the ground．Blood was running again from the cut in my arm，and I could not stand．Fritz jumped down from his horse and lifted me in his arms．
　　'Dear friend！'he said．'Thank God I've found you！ When Johann did not come，we had to break down the castle door．We were afraid we would be too late．'
　　'And the King…？'I said．
　　'Thanks to a very brave Englishman，'Fritz said gently，'the King is alive．'






■ 13 Goodbye to Ruritania
　　Old Sapt worked hard to keep our secret hidden．He sent messages，told lies，and gave orders．All his plans were successful，except one．Nothing can stop a woman in love．
　　When Princess Flavia heard that the King was hurt，she refused to stay at Tarlenheim House and rode at once to the Castle of Zenda．Sapt had hidden me in a room in the old castle，and he and Fritz brought her to me there．How happy she was to see me！She threw her arms round my neck and kissed me．
　　'No！'cried Sapt．'It's not the King．Don't kiss him．He is the man you love-but he is not the King！'
　　Flavia's face went white．'What do you mean？'she cried．She turned to me again．'Rudolf！Why do you let them say these things？'
　　I looked deeply into her eyes．
　　'It's true，'I said quietly．'I am not the King．'
　　For a minute she continued to hold on to me．She looked at Sapt，at Fritz，and finally at me again．Then，slowly，she fell forward and I laid her gently on the ground．
　　'I wish that Rupert had killed me，'I said．
　　* * *
　　I saw the King once more．He thanked me，and I gave him back the royal Elphberg ring．If he noticed Flavia's ring on my finger，he said nothing．We both knew that we would never meet again．
　　Before I left Ruritania，Princess Flavia asked to see me again，and Fritz took me to her．They had told her everything．
　　We had so much to say-and so little to say．A princess is not free to choose who to love．
　　'Flavia，'I said，'I love you．I'll love you until the day I die．'
　　As I walked away，I heard her say my name again and again．'Rudolf…Rudolf…'I can hear it now．
　　* * *
　　I live quietly now，but every year Fritz and I meet in a little town outside Ruritania．There，he gives me news of the Queen of Ruritania，the wife of King Rudolf the Fifth．And every year he brings me a red rose and a note with the words written：Rudolf-Flavia-always．And I send her a red rose with the same message．
　　Shall I ever see her again？ Who knows？




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Alice's Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll





■ 1 Looking-glass house
　　One thing was certain，it was the black kitten that began it all.The white kitten had been unable to do anything for the last quarter of an hour，because the old cat was washing its face，very slowly and very carefully．
　　But the black kitten was free to do what it wanted．And so，while Alice was sitting in a corner of the great armchair，half talking to herself and half asleep，the kitten was playing a grand game with a ball of wool．Soon the wool was lying in a terrible tangle all over the carpet，with the kitten running after its own tail in the middle．
　　‘Oh，you bad little thing！’cried Alice，when she saw the wool．She picked up the kitten and climbed back into the armchair．‘You really mustn't play with the wool，you know．It will take me so long to roll the ball up again．Why don't you play chess instead，Kitty？When I was playing a while ago，you were watching me so carefully．In fact，you look just like the Red Queen yourself．’
　　And Alice picked up the Red Queen from the chessmen on the table，and held it up to show the kitten．But the kitten tried to escape，and，to punish it，Alice lifted it up to the looking-glass above the fireplace．‘If you're not good，Kitty，’she said，‘I'll put you through into looking-glass house．How would you like that？
　　‘I do wonder，’Alice went on，‘if everything in that room is the same as in our room．The things that I can see look the same-except the books，because the words go the wrong way．But perhaps the rest of the house is really different and full of interesting things．Oh，I wish we could get through，Kitty！Let's pretend we can．Let's pretend the glass has gone soft and…Why，I do believe it has！It's turning into a kind of cloud…’
　　Alice did not know how it happened，but while she was speaking，she found herself climbing up to the looking-glass． And the glass was beginning to disappear，just like a bright silvery cloud．
　　In another moment Alice was through the glass and had jumped down into the looking-glass room．At once she began looking around and noticed that several things were very different from the old room．The pictures on the wall all seemed to be alive，and the clock above the fireplace had the face of a little old man，who smiled at her．
　　‘This room isn't as tidy as the other one，’Alice thought to herself，as she noticed several chessmen on the floor by the fireplace．But the next moment， with a little‘Oh！’of surprise，she was down on the floor herself，watching them．
　　The chessmen were walking around， arm in arm！
　　‘Here are the Red King and the Red Queen，’Alice said，in a whisper，in order not to frighten them．‘And there are two Castles walking together．And two of the Pawns，and a white Bishop reading a newspaper…I don't think they can hear me or see me，’she went on．‘I wonder-’
　　Then something on the table behind her made a noise．Alice turned to look and saw that one of the White Pawns had fallen over and begun to cry.She watched it with interest.
　　‘It is the voice of my child！’ cried the White Queen by the fireplace．‘My dear Lily！My sweet child！’and she began to climb wildly up the table leg.
　　Poor little Lily was now screaming loudly．Alice wanted to be helpful，so she picked up the Queen and put her on the table next to her noisy little daughter．
　　The Queen sat very still，with her mouth open，for almost a minute. Then she called down to the White King，who was still on the floor by the fireplace．‘Be careful of the storm！’
　　‘What storm？’said the King，looking round worriedly．
　　‘There's a terrible wind-it blew me up here in a second． You come up the usual way，and be careful！’
　　Alice watched as the White King slowly began to climb the table leg．Then she said，‘It will take you hours to get up.Why don't I help you？’Gently，she picked him up and moved him slowly upwards. The King was very surprised indeed. His eyes and his mouth got larger and larger，and rounder and rounder. Alice nearly dropped him because she was laughing so much．
　　When she put him down on the table， he immediately fell flat on his back and lay still. But after a while he sat up，andspoke to the Queen in a frightened whisper．
　　‘I tell you，my dear， I turned cold to the very ends of my hair！I shall never，never forget that moment．’
　　‘You will，’the Queen said，‘if you don't write it down．’
　　Alice watched with interest as the King took out a very large notebook and began writing．Then she saw a book lying on the table near her，and began to turn the pages．
　　‘It's all in some language that I don't know，’ she said to herself．It was like this．
　　Puzzled，she looked at it for some time，then suddenly understood．‘Of course，it's a looking-glass book！If I hold it up to the glass，the words will go the right way again.’
　　This was the poem that Alice read．
　　JABBERWOCKY
　　’Twas brillig，and the slithy toves
　　Did gyre and gimble in the wabe；
　　All mimsy were the borogoves，
　　And the mome raths outgrabe．
　　‘It seems very pretty，’Alice said，‘but a little hard to un-derstand．’（Actually，she didn't understand a word of it，but didn't like to say so．）‘It seems to fill my head with ideas- but I don't know what they are！’
　　Then she suddenly jumped up，as another idea came to her．‘If I don't hurry，I shall have to go back through the looking-glass before I've seen the rest of the house，and the garden．I'll look at the garden first，I think．’
　　In a moment she was out of the room and running down the stairs．But it wasn't really running， because she was moving gently through the air and her feet weren't touching the stairs at all．At the bottom she managed to catch hold of the doorpost，and after that she was pleased to find herself walking again in a natural way．






■ 2 The garden of live flowers
　　There was a small hill not far away and Alice decided to walk to it．‘I shall be able to see the garden better from the top of the hill，’she said．
　　She tried very hard to reach the hill，but it seemed impossible to get to it．She went first this way，then that way，but every time she turned a corner，she found herself back at the house．
　　‘I'm not going in again yet，’she told the house crossly．‘I'll have to go back through the looking-glass into the old room and that's the end of all my adventures then！’
　　She tried once more，and this time passed a large flowerbed，with a tree growing in the middle．
　　‘Oh Tiger-lily，’Alice said to one of the flowers，‘I wish you could talk！’
　　‘We can talk，’said the Tiger-lily，‘if there is anybody interesting enough to talk to．’For a minute Alice was too sur-prised to speak．Then she said，almost in a whisper，‘And can all the flowers talk？’
　　‘As well as you can，’said the Tiger-lily．‘And a lot louder．’
　　‘It isn't polite for us to begin，you know，’said the Rose，‘and I was really wondering when you would speak．’
　　‘But why can you all talk？’Alice said，puzzled．‘I've been in many gardens before，and none of the flowers could talk．’
　　‘Put your hand down and feel the ground，’said the Tiger-lily．‘Then you'll know why．’
　　Alice did so．‘It's very hard，’she said，‘but how does that explain it？’
　　‘In most gardens，’the Tiger-lily said，‘they make the flowerbeds too soft-so the flowers are always asleep．’
　　This sounded a very good reason to Alice．‘I never thought of that before！’she said．
　　‘Do you ever think at all？’asked the Rose，unkindly．
　　‘I never saw anybody with a more stupid face，’said a Daisy suddenly．It was the first time it had spoken，and Alice jumped in surprise．
　　‘Oh，be quiet！’cried the Tiger-lily．‘What do you Daisies know about the world？’
　　‘Are there any other people in the garden？’Alice asked．
　　‘There's one other flower that can move around like you，’said the Rose．‘She's the same strange shape as you，but she's redder，with more leaves than you have．’
　　‘She's coming now！’cried another Daisy．‘I can hear her feet-bang，bang，bang，on the ground．’
　　Alice looked round quickly，and saw that it was the Red Queen．‘She's grown a lot，’Alice thought．When she had seen her by the fireplace，the Queen had been only eight cen-timetres high．Now she was taller than Alice herself！
　　‘I think I'll go and meet her，’Alice said．
　　‘You can't possibly do that，’ said the Rose．‘You must walk the other way if you want to meet her．’
　　This sounded nonsense to Alice，so she began to walk to-wards the Red Queen．To her surprise，she found herself a minute later walking in through the front door of the house.She turned round crossly，and saw the Queen again，on the other side of the garden．This time she tried walking the other way，away from the Queen.
　　It succeeded beautifully．A minute later she was standing opposite the Red Queen，and very near the hill that she had wanted to get to．
　　‘Where do you come from？’said the Red Queen．‘Where are you going？And why are you here at all？Look up，speak nicely，keep your hands still．And curtsy while you're think-ing what to say．It saves time．’
　　Alice tried to obey all these orders，feeling just a little frightened of the Queen．
　　‘I only wanted to look at the garden，your Majesty，from the top of that hill，’she began．
　　‘Hill！’cried the Queen．‘Some people would call that a valley．’
　　‘But a hill can't be a valley，’ said Alice.‘That would be nonsense．’
　　The Red Queen shook her head．‘You can call it nonsense if you like．Some people would say it was sensible！’
　　Alice curtsied again，and decided it would be safer not to ar- gue any more．Together，they walked on in silence up the hill．At the top Alice could see right across the country-and a very strange country it was．There were lots of little brooks running across from side to side，and there were long lines of hedges，going the other way．It was a country of squares．
　　‘It's just like a large chess-board！’Alice said at last．‘Oh， and I can see some chessmen down there！’Her heart began to beat fast with excitement．‘It's a great game of chess， as big as the world itself-if this is the world at all．Oh，what fun！ I wish I could be in it，even as a Pawn．Although I would love to be a Queen，of course．’
　　She looked a little worriedly at the real Queen as she said this．But the Red Queen smiled kindly， and said，‘You can be the White Queen's Pawn，if you like．Lily is too young to play．You're in the Second Square now，and when you get to the Eighth Square，you'll be a Queen-’
　　Just at that moment，they began to run．Alice never did un-derstand how it happened，but she had no time to think about it because they were running so fast．
　　‘Faster！Faster！’cried the Queen，pulling Alice's hand． They ran like the wind，but the strange thing was that they never seemed to pass anything．The trees and other things round them never changed their places at all．
　　Alice was very puzzled by this， but still the Queen cried，‘Faster！Faster！’Now they were almost flying over the ground．Alice had never run so fast in her life．
　　When at last they stopped，she had to sit down because her legs were shaking．Then she looked around in surprise．
　　‘But we've been under this same tree all the time！ We're still in the same place！’
　　‘Of course we are，’said the Queen．‘Why shouldn't we be？’
　　‘Well，in our country，’said Alice，‘if you run very fast for a long time，you usually arrive at a different place．’
　　‘What a slow kind of country！’said the Queen．‘Here，you see，you have to run very fast，just to keep in the same place．If you want to go somewhere different，you must run twice as fast．Now，’she went on，‘I shall tell you what to do．While I'm speaking，I shall take five steps，and at the fifth step，I shall go．’
　　She took two steps away from the tree and turned round．‘A pawn goes two squares in its first move．So you'll go very quickly through the Third Square-by railway，probably．Then you'll be in the Fourth Square，which belongs to Twee-dledum and Tweedledee．The Fifth Square is mostly water，and the Sixth belongs to Humpty Dumpty．But why haven't you said anything？’
　　‘I didn't know I had to say anything，’said Alice．
　　‘It's polite，’said the Queen，‘to say thank you for all this information．But never mind．Let's pretend you said it．The Seventh Square is all forest-one of the Knights will show you the way-and in the Eighth Square we shall be Queens together，and it's all parties and fun！’
　　Alice got up and curtsied，and sat down again．
　　The Queen took another two steps and turned round again．‘Speak in French when you can't think of the English word-and always remember who you are！’
　　She took another step，and was gone．Alice did not know if she had disappeared into the air，or run into the wood．But she had certainly gone，and Alice began to remember that she was a Pawn，and that it would soon be time to move．






■ 3 Looking-glass animals
　　Alice stood at the top of the hill and looked down.
　　‘Which way should I go？’she wondered．On one side she could see，a long way away，some kind of large animals walking around．She wasn't sure that she liked the look of them，so she decided to go the other way．She ran down the hill and jumped over the first of the six little brooks.
　　* * * * *
　　* * * *
　　* * * * *
　　‘Tickets，please！’said the Ticket Inspector，putting his head in at the window. In a moment everybody was holding out a ticket；the tickets were almost as big as the people，and seemed to fill the train.
　　‘Show your ticket，child！’the Inspector went on，looking angrily at Alice. And then several voices said all together，‘Don't keep him waiting，child！His time costs a thousand pounds a minute！’
　　‘I'm afraid I haven't got a ticket，’Alice said in a frightened voice．‘There wasn't a ticket-office where I came from．’
　　‘Why didn't you buy one from the engine-driver？’said the Inspector. And again the voices said，‘The engine-driver's time costs a thousand pounds a minute！’
　　The Inspector looked at Alice first through his glasses，then over the top of them．Then he said，‘You're travelling the wrong way，’and shut up the window and went away．
　　‘She ought to know which way she's going，’said the gen-tleman sitting opposite Alice（he was dressed in white paper），‘but perhaps she doesn't know her own name．’
　　A Goat，that was sitting next to the gentleman in white，said loudly，‘She ought to know her way to the ticket-office，but perhaps she can't read or write．’
　　There was a Beetle next to the Goat，and he had something to say about Alice as well．Then other voices spoke，but Alice could not see who they were．One voice sounded like a horse，she thought．And then a very small voice，right next to her ear，said，‘You could make a poem out of that-something about“a horse，of course”.’
　　The gentleman in white paper spoke again．‘Don't worry，my dear，’he whispered．‘Just buy a return ticket every time the train stops．’
　　‘No， I won't！’Alice said crossly．‘I don't belong to this railway journey at all．I was in a wood just now，and I wish I could get back there．’
　　Then she heard the little voice again．She looked round，but could see nothing．‘I know you are a friend，’the voice said in her ear，‘a dear friend. And you won't hurt me，although I am an insect.’
　　‘What kind of insect？’Alice asked，a little worried．But just then there came a long scream from the engine，and eve-rybody jumped up．The Horse put his head out of the window，then pulled it back in and said calmly，‘It's only a brook that we have to jump across.’
　　Alice did not like the idea of trains jumping brooks．‘But we'll get into the Fourth Square，I suppose，’she said to her-self．In another moment she felt the train go straight up into the air．Frightened，she caught at the thing nearest to her hand，which happened to be the Goat's beard．
　　* * * * *
　　* * * *
　　* * * * *
　　But the beard seemed to disappear as she touched it，and she found herself sitting quietly under a tree．There was an Insect sitting near her，on a low branch of the tree．
　　It was a very large insect indeed-almost as big as a chick-en．Alice thought．
　　‘So you don't like all insects？’the Insect said， quietly con-tinuing their conversation．
　　‘I like them when they can talk，’Alice said．‘None of them ever talk，where I come from．But everything here is so different．I probably don't even know the names of the insects here．’
　　‘Can you remember your own name？’asked the Insect．
　　‘Of course，’said Alice．‘Nobody forgets their own name．’
　　‘Don't they？’said the Insect．‘There's a wood down there，for example，where things have no names．’
　　Alice looked round，and saw a dark wood on the other side of an open field．When she looked back，the Insect had flown away．She got up and began to walk across the field.‘This must be the way to the Eighth Square，’she thought，‘but I hope I don't lose my name in this wood.’
　　She soon reached the wood and was pleased to get out of the hot sun and into the shadows under the trees.‘How nice and cool it is in here，under the…under the…under the what？’she said，surprised that she could not think of the word．She put her hand on a tree．‘What does it call itself？I do believe it's got no name！’
　　She stood for a moment，thinking.‘And now，who am I？I will remember，if I can.’She tried and tried，but she just could not remember her name. It began with an‘L’，she thought，but she wasn't really sure．
　　So she hurried on through the wood， hoping to get to the other side quickly，and after a while she came out into another open field．She stopped，and thought hard.‘Why，it's Alice，of course！’she said．‘My name's Alice-I won't forget itagain．And now，which way should I go？’
　　It was not a difficult question to answer．There was only one road，and a large signpost，which said：
　　To TWEEDLEDUM'S HOUSE
　　To THE HOUSE OF TWEEDLEDEE
　　‘I'll just call in and say hello，’Alice said，‘and ask them the way to the Eighth Square．I would like to get there before it gets dark．’So she walked on，talking to herself as she went. After a long time the road came into another wood and suddenly turned a corner，and there in front of her Alice saw two fat little men standing under a tree.



　　* * * * *
　　* * * *
　　* * * * *
　　* * * * *
　　* * * *
　　* * * * *



■ 4 Tweedledum and Tweedledee
　　Alice knew immediately which one was which，because each had his name on his shirt．They were standing very still，with their arms round each other，and Alice forgot that they were alive．‘They look just like schoolboys，’she said aloud．Then one of them spoke，and Alice jumped in sur-prise.
　　‘You've begun wrong！’cried the one called Tweedledum．‘The first thing in a visit is to say“How do you do？” and shake hands．’And here the brothers held out the two hands that were free，to shake hands with her．
　　Alice did not know which hand to shake first，so she took hold of both hands at once．The next moment they were all three dancing round in a circle．This seemed very natural at the time，and Alice was not even surprised to hear music play-ing.
　　The two brothers were fat，and soon got tired．‘Four times round is enough for one dance，’Tweedledee said，and they stopped as suddenly as they had begun．Then they stood look-ing at Alice in silence．
　　Alice did not know what to say.How do you begin a con-versation with people that you have just been dancing with？she wondered．
　　‘I hope you're not too tired？’she said at last．
　　‘Not at all．And thank you very much for asking，’said Tweedledum．
　　‘Very kind of you，’added Tweedledee．‘Do you like po-ems？’
　　‘Ye-es… well，some poems，’Alice said carefully．‘Would you tell me which road to take out of the wood？’
　　‘What shall I repeat to her？’Tweedledee said to Tweedle-dum，not noticing Alice's question．
　　‘The Walrus and the Carpenter is the longest，’Tweedle-dum replied，putting a friendly arm round his brother．
　　‘If it's very long，’Alice said politely，‘would you tell me first which road-’
　　Tweedledee smiled gently and began his poem．It was a very long poem indeed-all about a Walrus and a Carpenter，who went for a walk along a beach and invited lots of young Oysters to go with them. The Oysters accepted happily．
　　‘Perhaps that wasn't very sensible of them，’Alice said．
　　Tweedledee only smiled，and continued：
　　The Walrus and the Carpenter
　　Walked on a mile or so，
　　And then they rested on a rock
　　Conveniently low；
　　And all the little Oysters stood
　　And waited in a row.
　　‘The time has come，’the Walrus said，
　　‘To talk of many things：
　　Of shoes-and ships-and sealing-wax-
　　Of cabbages-and kings-
　　And why the sea is boiling hot-
　　And whether pigs have wings．’
　　Alice waited with interest to hear about this conversation，but it never happened，because the Walrus and the Carpenter went on to eat all the Oysters instead．
　　At the end Alice said，‘I like the Walrus best，because he said he felt sorry for the poor Oysters．’
　　‘He ate more of them than the Carpenter，’said Tweedledee．‘He ate faster，you see．’
　　‘Oh！’said Alice．‘Well then，I like the Carpenter best．’
　　‘But he ate as many as he could get，’said Tweedledum．
　　‘Well，they were both very unkind-’Alice began，then stopped when she heard a noise in the wood．It sounded like a wild animal．‘What's that？’she asked，afraid．
　　‘It's only the Red King snoring，’said Tweedledee．‘Come and look at him．’
　　The brothers each took one of Alice's hands and they went through the wood to where the King was sleeping．
　　‘Doesn't he look lovely？’said Tweedledum．
　　Alice really couldn't agree．The King was lying in a very untidy way，and was snoring loudly．
　　‘He's dreaming now，’said Tweedledee，‘and what do you think he's dreaming about？’
　　‘Nobody can guess that，’said Alice．
　　‘Why，about you！’Tweedledee said．‘And if he stops dreaming about you，where do you think you will be？’
　　‘Where I am now，of course，’said Alice．
　　‘Oh no！’said Tweedledum．‘You'll be nowhere．You're only a kind of thing in his dream！If he wakes up，you'll go out-bang！-just like a light！’
　　‘What nonsense！’Alice said crossly．‘And if I'm only a kind of thing in his dream，what are you，I'd like to know．’
　　‘The same！’the brothers cried together．
　　‘Shhh！Don't make so much noise，’Alice said．‘You'll wake him up．’
　　‘How can you wake him，’said Tweedledum，‘when you're only one of the things in his dream？You know very well that you're not real．’
　　‘I am real！’said Alice，and began to cry．
　　‘I don't know why you're crying，’Tweedledee said un-kindly．‘You won't become real that way．’
　　‘I know they're talking nonsense，’Alice thought to herself，‘and there really isn't anything to cry about．’She gave herself a little shake，then said，‘I think I must find my way out of the wood now，because it's getting very dark．Do you think it's going to rain？’
　　‘Possibly，’Tweedledum said，opening a large umbrella．
　　It was now getting very dark indeed and Alice thought there must be a storm coming．‘What a thick black cloud that is！’she said．‘And how fast it comes！Why，I do believe it’got wings！’
　　‘It's the crow！’Tweedledee shouted fearfully．The two brothers turned to run and had disappeared in a moment．
　　Alice ran too，and hid under some low trees．‘It can't get me under here，’she thought，‘but I wish its wings didn't make so much wind．It's blowing everything around terribly-and look！Here's somebody's shawl flying through the air！’






■ 5 The White Queen
　　She caught the shawl as she spoke，and looked around for the owner．A moment later the White Queen came running wildly through the wood．Alice went to meet her with the shawl．
　　‘I'm pleased I was able to catch it for you，’Alice said，as she helped the Queen to put on her shawl again．‘Am I speak-ing to the White Queen？’she added politely．
　　‘Yes，’said the Queen，as she pulled helplessly at her shawl．‘Oh dear！I don't know what's the matter with my shawl today．I think it's angry with me．I've pinned it here，and I've pinned it there，but it's just not happy．’
　　‘But it can't go straight，you know，if you pin it all on one side，’Alice said，as she gently put it right for her．‘And I'm afraid your hair is terribly untidy．’
　　‘The hairbrush is lost in it somewhere，’the Queen said un-happily．
　　Alice carefully took out the brush and pinned up the Queen's hair more tidily．‘There，you look better now，’she said．‘But really you should have a lady's maid．’
　　‘I'd be happy to take you，’the Queen said．‘Twopence a week，and jam every other day．’
　　‘I don't want you to employ me，’Alice said，laughing．‘And I don't like jam．’
　　‘It's very good jam，’said the Queen． ‘Well，I don't want any today，thank you．’
　　‘But you can't have jam today，’the Queen said．‘It's jam tomorrow and jam yesterday-but never jam today．’
　　‘It must be “jam today”sometimes，’Alice argued．
　　‘No，it isn't，’said the Queen．‘It's jam every other day．Today isn't any other day，you know．’
　　‘I don't understand that，’said Alice，very puzzled．
　　‘That's because we live backwards here，’explained the Queen kindly．‘It's always a little difficult at first．’
　　‘Live backwards！’Alice repeated，in great surprise．‘I never heard of anybody doing that．’
　　‘But there's one very useful thing about it，’the Queen went on，‘you can remember things both ways．’
　　‘I only remember things one way，’Alice said.‘I can't re-member things before they happen．’
　　‘That's not very useful，’said the Queen．‘I can remember things that happened the week after next．For example，the King's Messenger is in prison now，but he hasn't done any-thing wrong yet．His crime will come much later．’
　　‘But what happens if there is no crime，’asked Alice，‘and he doesn't do anything wrong at all？ That seems a strange way of-’
　　At that moment the Queen began to scream very loudly，and to shake her hand around in the air．‘Oh，oh！’she shout-ed．‘My finger's bleeding！Oh，oh，oh！’
　　Alice put her hands over her ears．‘What is the matter？’she said，in between the Queen's screams．‘Have you cut your finger？’
　　‘I haven't cut it yet，’the Queen said，‘but I soon shall-oh，oh，oh！’
　　‘When do you think you will do it？’Alice asked，trying not to laugh．
　　‘When I fasten my shawl again，’the Queen said unhappily，‘one of the pins will come out and-oh，oh！’As she said the words，one of her shawl pins came undone and she quickly took hold of it，trying to fasten it again．
　　‘Take care！’cried Alice．‘You're holding it wrong！’She tried to help the Queen，but it was too late-the pin had al-ready gone deep into the Queen's finger．
　　‘That explains the bleeding，you see，’the Queen said to Alice with a smile．‘Now you understand the way things hap-pen here．’
　　‘But why don't you scream now？’Alice asked，holding her hands ready to put over her ears again．
　　‘I've done all the screaming already，’said the Queen．‘Why do it all again？’
　　‘It's very difficult to believe，’Alice said，‘that life can happen backwards．’
　　‘Try to believe something a bit easier，’said the Queen helpfully．‘For example，I'm a hundred and one years old．’
　　‘I can't believe that！’said Alice．
　　‘Can't you？’the Queen said，shaking her head sadly．‘Try again．Put your hands together and shut your eyes．’
　　Alice laughed．‘There's no use trying，’she said．‘Nobody can believe impossible things．’
　　‘Perhaps you don't work hard enough at it，’said the Queen．‘When I was a child，I worked at it for an hour a day．Why，sometimes I've believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast．There goes my shawl again！’
　　The pins had come undone again as she spoke，and a sudden wind blew her shawl across a little brook．The Queen went flying after it，and managed to catch it．‘I've got it！’she called happily．‘Now you will see me pin it on again，all by myself．’
　　‘Then I hope your finger is better now？’Alice said very po-litely，as she crossed the brook after the Queen．
　　* * * * *
　　* * * *
　　* * * * *
　　‘Oh，much better！’cried the Queen，her voice getting higher and higher as she went on．‘Much be-etter！Be-e-e-ter！ Be-e-eh！’The last word sounded very like the sound that a sheep makes，and Alice looked at the Queen in surprise．
　　And indeed，the Queen was now covered in a thick woolly coat，and…Alice closed her eyes，then opened them again．She couldn't understand what had happened at all．The wood had disappeared，and she was in a little dark shop-and it re-ally was a sheep in front of her，wearing large glasses and sit-ting calmly on a chair，knitting．
　　‘What do you want to buy？’the Sheep said at last，lookingup for a moment from her knitting.
　　‘I'm not sure at the moment， ’Alice said gently．‘May Ilook round first？’
　　She began to walk round the shop， looking at everything．But every time she looked hard at something，it seemed tomove and then appear again a moment later in a differentplace．So it was difficult to see clearly what was there． Shewent on walking， and soon realized that the shop was muchbigger than she had thought．
　　‘What a strange shop！’Alice said．‘I wish things wouldkeep still！’
　　A few minutes later the shop became even stranger， becauseAlice found herself walking beside a large lake， with tall greenplants growing round the edge．She put out her hand to picksome， but the plants disappeared when she touched them．
　　‘Oh， what a pity！’said Alice．‘I would like to take somehome．They look so pretty．’
　　‘There are lots of other things here，’said the Sheep．‘Butyou must decide what you want to buy．’
　　‘To buy！’Alice said，jumping a little in surprise．The lakehad gone，and she was back in the little dark shop．The Sheepwas still knitting， and was looking at her crossly over the topof her glasses．
　　‘I would like to buy an egg，please，’Alice said．‘Howmuch do they cost？’
　　‘Fivepence for one， twopence for two，’the Sheep replied．
　　‘So two are cheaper than one？’Alice said in a surprisedvoice，taking out her purse．
　　‘But you must eat them both，if you buy two，’said theSheep.
　　‘Then I'll have one，please，’said Alice，giving the Sheepfivepence．
　　The Sheep took the money，then said，‘You must get ityourself，you know．It's at the end of the shop．’
　　The end of the shop was very dark，and was crowded withtables and chairs．Alice could see the egg，but she neverseemed to get near it．She almost fell over a chair，and thenrealized that it was not a chair at all，but a small tree．‘Whyare trees growing here？’she wondered．‘This is the strangestshop that I ever saw！And now here's a little brook as well！’
　　* * * * *
　　* * * *
　　* * * * *
　　So she went on， wondering more and more at every step．Af-ter a while everything had turned into a tree，and she thoughtthat the egg would soon do the same．



　　* * * * *
　　* * * *
　　* * * * *
　　* * * * *
　　* * * *
　　* * * * *



■ 6 Humpty Dumpty
　　But the egg got larger and larger， and more and morelike a person. Then Alice saw that it had eyes and anose and a mouth，and she realized that it was HUMPTYDUMPTY himself.
　　‘It must be him，’she said to herself．‘There he is， sittingon a high wall，and he looks just like an egg．’
　　He was sitting very still and seemed to be asleep，so Alicestood and repeated to herself the words of the song：
　　Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall；
　　Humpty Dumpty had a great fall．
　　All the King's horses and all the King's men
　　Couldn't put Humpty together again．
　　‘Don't stand there talking to yourself，’said HumptyDumpty suddenly，opening his eyes．‘Tell me your name.’
　　‘My name is Alice-’
　　‘That's a stupid name！’said Humpty Dumpty.‘What doesit mean？’
　　‘Must a name mean something？’Alice asked，puzzled.
　　‘Of course it must，’Humpty Dumpty said with a shortlaugh．‘My name means the shape I am-and a very goodshape it is， too. With a name like yours， you could be almostany shape．’
　　‘Why do you sit out here all alone？’said Alice，not wishingto argue.
　　‘Because there's nobody with me！’ cried Humpty Dumpty．‘Did you think I didn't know the answer to that？Come，let'shave some intelligent conversation now．’
　　Alice tried to think of something intelligent to say， butcouldn't．‘What a beautiful belt you're wearing！’she said，suddenly noticing it．
　　‘That's better，’said Humpty Dumpty，looking pleased．‘Yes，it was a present from the White King and Queen．Theygave it to me for an unbirthday present．’
　　Alice looked puzzled．‘What is an unbirthday present？’
　　‘A present when it isn't your birthday，of course．’
　　Alice thought about this．‘I like birthday presents best，’ shesaid at last．
　　‘You don't know what you're talking about！’cried HumptyDumpty．‘How many days are there in a year？’
　　‘Three hundred and sixty-five，’said Alice．
　　‘And how many birthdays have you？’
　　‘One．’
　　‘And if you take one from three hundred and sixty-five，what is left？’
　　‘Three hundred and sixty-four， of course．’
　　‘So there's only one day when you can get birthdaypresents，’said Humpty Dumpty，‘but three hundred and six-ty-four days when you can get unbirthday presents！There'ssuccess for you！’
　　‘I don't know what you mean by “success”，’Alice said．
　　Humpty Dumpty smiled．‘Of course you don't-until I tellyou．I meant “there's a clever idea for you！”’
　　‘But“success” doesn't mean “a clever idea”，’Alice argued．
　　‘When I use a word，’Humpty Dumpty said，looking downhis nose at Alice，‘it means just what I choose it to mean-neither more nor less．’
　　‘But can you make words have different meanings？’askedAlice．
　　‘Words are difficult things，I agree，’said HumptyDumpty．‘But you have to be strong with them．Give them or-ders．Tell them to obey you．They must work hard，and dowhat they're told！’ He banged his hand excitedly on the wallas he spoke．
　　‘You seem very clever with words，Sir，’said Alicepolitely，hoping to calm him．She was worried about himfalling off the wall．
　　Humpty Dumpty looked pleased．‘I can explain mostwords，and get them to do what I want，’he said．‘Some ofthem are like suitcases， you know．They've got several mean-ings packed up in them．Take poems，for example．One shortpoem can carry as many meanings as five people's luggage.’
　　‘Somebody repeated a poem to me earlier today，’saidAlice．‘It was Tweedledee，I think．’
　　‘Oh，I can repeat any number of poems，if you like，’saidHumpty Dumpty．
　　‘Well， not just at the moment，’Alice said quickly，hopingto stop him from beginning．
　　‘This piece was written specially for you，’Humpty Dump-ty went on，not listening to her．‘It will amuse you．’
　　‘Thank you，’said Alice sadly． She could not refuse to lis-ten，she thought，if the poem was specially written for her．
　　In winter，when the fields are white，
　　I sing this song for your delight-
　　‘But I don't sing it，’he explained．
　　‘Yes，I can see that，’Alice said．
　　‘If you can see me singing or not singing， you've better eyesthan most people，’ said Humpty Dumpty．Alice was silent，and he went on．
　　In spring， when woods are getting green，
　　I'll try and tell you what I mean.
　　‘Thank you very much，’ said Alice．
　　In summer， when the days are long，
　　Perhaps you'll understand the song.
　　In autumn， when the leaves are brown，
　　Take pen and ink and write it down．
　　‘I will，if I can remember it so long，’said Alice．
　　‘Don't go on saying things，’Humpty Dumpty said．‘They're not sensible， and I forget where I am.’
　　I sent a message to the fish；
　　I told them‘This is what I wish.’
　　The little fishes of the sea，
　　They sent an answer back to me．
　　The little fishes’answer was
　　‘We cannot do it，Sir，because-’
　　‘I'm afraid I don't understand，’said Alice.
　　‘It gets easier as it goes on，’ Humpty Dumpty replied.
　　But the poem went on for a long time， and Alice thought itgot harder，not easier，to understand. Then Humpty Dumptysuddenly stopped， and there was a long silence.
　　‘Is that all？’Alice asked politely．
　　‘That's all，’said Humpty Dumpty．‘Goodbye.’
　　Alice waited a minute，but Humpty Dumpty closed his eyesand did not speak again. So she got up， said‘goodbye’， andquietly walked away．
　　‘What an extraordinary person！’she said to herself as shewalked．‘I don't think I ever met-’She never finished whatshe was saying，because at that moment a heavy crash shookthe forest from end to end.






■ 7 The Lion and the Unicorn
　　The next moment soldiers came running through thewood，at first in twos and threes，then ten or twentytogether，and at last in great crowds that seemed to fill theforest．Alice got behind a tree and watched them go past．
　　They were very strange soldiers，she thought．They werealways falling over something or other， and when one soldierwent down，several more always fell over him．Soon theground was covered with fallen men．
　　Then came the horses．With four feet，they managed betterthan the foot-soldiers， but even they fell more often than not．And when a horse fell， the rider always fell off at once． It wasalmost like a battle in itself，and Alice decided it would besafer to move on．Soon she came to an open place， where shefound the White King sitting on the ground， busily writing inhis notebook．
　　‘I've sent them all！’the King cried happily when he sawAlice．‘Did you happen to meet any soldiers， my dear， as youcame through the wood？’
　　‘Yes，I did，’said Alice．‘Several thousand，I think．’
　　‘Four thousand two hundred and seven，’ the King said，looking at his book．‘I couldn't send all the horses，becausetwo of them are wanted in the game．And I haven't sent theMessengers， Haigha and Hatta．I need them myself， of course-to come and go．One to come，and one to go．’
　　‘I don't think I understand，’ said Alice．‘Why one to comeand one to go？’
　　‘I've told you，’the King said crossly．‘I must have two-to fetch and carry．One to fetch， and one to carry．’
　　At that moment Haigha，one of the Messengers，arrived．He had very large hands and great eyes，which were alwaysmoving wildly from side to side．
　　‘What's the news from town？’ said the King．
　　‘I'll whisper it，’said Haigha， putting his mouth close tothe King's ear．
　　Alice was sorry about this，because she wanted to hear thenews too．But，instead of whispering，Haigha shouted at thetop of his voice，‘They're at it again！’
　　‘Do you call that a whisper？’ cried the poor King， jumpingup and shaking himself．‘Don't do that again！’
　　‘Who are at it again？’ Alice asked．
　　‘The Lion and the Unicorn，of course，’said the King．
　　‘Fighting for the crown？’
　　‘Yes， and it's my crown that they're fighting about！’saidthe King．‘Amusing， isn't it？ Let's run and see them．’
　　They began to run，and as they went，Alice repeated to her-self the words of the old song．
　　The Lion and the Unicorn
　　were fighting for the crown；
　　The Lion beat the Unicorn
　　all round the town．
　　Some gave them white bread
　　and some gave them brown；
　　Some gave them plum-cake
　　and drummed them out of town．
　　Soon they saw a great crowd in front of them， and in themiddle the Lion and the Unicorn were fighting． Hatta， theother Messenger， was standing at the edge of the crowd，witha cup of tea in one hand and a piece of bread and butter in theother．He looked very unhappy．
　　‘He's only just come out of prison，’ Haigha whispered inAlice's ear，‘so he's very hungry and thirsty，you see．Howare you，dear child？’ he said to Hatta，in a friendly voice．
　　Hatta looked round， but went on eating his bread and butterand drinking his tea．
　　‘Come，tell us the news！’ cried the King．‘How are theygetting on with the fight？’
　　‘They're getting on very well，’Hatta said through amouthful of bread and butter．‘Each of them has been down about eighty-seven times．’
　　‘Then I suppose they'll soon bring the white bread and thebrown，’ Alice said．
　　‘It's waiting for them now，’said Hatta．‘I'm eating a bitof it myself．’
　　The fight stopped just then，and the Lion and the Unicornsat down，looking tired．
　　The King called out，‘Ten minutes for tea！’，and Haighaand Hatta began to carry round plates of white and brownbread．Alice took a piece to taste， but it was very dry.
　　‘I don't think they'll fight any more today，’the King saidto Hatta．‘Go and order the drums to begin．’
　　As Alice watched him go，she suddenly saw somebody run-ning out of the wood．
　　‘Look！’she cried excitedly．‘There's the White Queen！She came flying out of the wood．How fast those Queens canrun！’
　　‘There's probably an enemy after her，’said the King， notlooking round．‘That wood's full of them. ’
　　‘But aren't you going to help her？’asked Alice，very sur-prised．
　　‘No use， no use！’said the King．‘She runs so terriblyquickly．You can't catch a Queen when she's running．’
　　At that moment the Unicorn came past，with his hands inhis pockets．When he saw Alice，he stopped and looked at herfor some minutes．He did not seem to like what he saw．
　　‘What- is- this？’ he said at last．
　　‘This is a child！’Haigha said helpfully，coming forward tointroduce Alice．‘We only found it today．It's as large as life，and twice as natural！’
　　‘I always thought they were fantastic monsters，’said theUnicorn．‘Is it alive？’
　　‘It can talk，’said Haigha．
　　The Unicorn looked dreamily at Alice．‘Talk， child．’
　　Alice smiled．‘I always thought that Unicorns were fantas-tic monsters，too！ I never saw one alive before．’
　　‘Well， we have now met and spoken，so we can believe ineach other， yes？’The Unicorn turned to the King．‘Fetchout the plum-cake，old man. I'm tried of brown bread！’
　　‘Certainly，certainly，’said the King，sounding a littlefrightened．‘Quick，Haigha， open the bag．’
　　Haigha was carrying a big bag round his neck， and now hetook ont of it a very large cake，a plate and a knife．He gavethem to Alice to hold．
　　The Lion had joined them while this was going on． Helooked very tired and sleepy，and his eyes were half shut．‘What's this？’ he said，looking at Alice．
　　‘An， what is it， then？’the Unicorn cried．‘You'll neverguess！I couldn't．’
　　The Lion looked at Alice without interest．‘Are you a veg-etable or an animal？’he asked tiredly．
　　‘It's a fantastic monster！’ the Unicorn cried，before Alicecould reply．
　　‘Then pass round the plum-cake，Monster，’the Lion said，lying down on the ground．‘And you two sit down，’he said tothe King and the Unicorn．
　　The King looked very uncomforable when he had to sit be-tween the Lion and the Unicorn，but there was no other placefor him．His crown nearly fell off because he was shaking somuch. The Unicorn looked amused，and then tried to arguewith the Lion about who was winning the fight.
　　‘I beat you all round the town，’ said the Lion angrily.‘And why is the Monster taking so long to cut up the cake？’
　　‘It's very difficult，’said Alice．‘I've cut off several piecesalready，but then they join up again immediately！’
　　‘You don't know how to manage looking-glass cakes，’saidthe Unicorn. ‘Pass it round first，and cut it up afterwards. ’
　　This sounded nonsense，but Alice got up and carried theplate round. At once the cake cut itself into three pieces， andthen Alice returned to her place with the empty plate.
　　‘Look at my piece of cake！’cried the Unicorn．‘The Mon-ster has given the Lion twice as much as me！’
　　‘She hasn't kept any for herself，’said the Lion. ‘Do youlike plum-cake， Monster？’
　　But before Alice could answer，the drums began．The airseemed full of the noise，and it rang and rang through herhead．Frightened， Alice began to run and jumped over the brook．
　　* * * * *
　　* * * *
　　* * * * *
　　Then she fell to the ground and put her hands over her ears，trying to shut out the terrible noise．
　　‘If that doesn't drum the Lion and the Unicorn out oftown，’she thought to herself，‘nothing ever will！’



■ 8 The White Knight
　　After a while the noise of the drums slowly died awayand everything became silent． Alice lifted her head andsaw that she was alone，but there，lying at her feet， was theplate on which she had tried to cut the plum-cake．
　　‘So I didn't dream the Lion and the Unicorn，then，’ shesaid to herself．‘But-oh dear！Perhaps we're all part of thesame dream． I do hope it's my dream， and not the RedKing's！ I don't like belonging to another person's dream．’
　　At this moment there was a loud shout，and a Knight in redarmour came riding through the forest towards her．Just as hereached her，the horse stopped suddenly．
　　‘You're my prisoner！’the Red Knight cried，as he fell offhis horse．
　　Alice was more worried for the Knight than for herself， buthe got up and slowly climbed back on to his horse．He began again to say，‘You're my-’， but then another shout rangthrough the forest．Alice looked round in surprise．
　　This time it was a White Knight．He rode up to Alice andwhen his horse stopped，he too fell off at once． He got onagain，and then the two Knights sat and looked at each othersilently．Alice watched them both，feeling very puzzled．
　　‘She's my prisoner，you know！’ the Red Knight said at
　　‘Yes， but then I came and saved her！’the White Knightreplied．
　　‘Well，we must fight for her，then，’said the Red Knight，and he began to put on his helmet，which was in the shape of ahorse's head．
　　When the White Knight had got into his helmet as well， thetwo began fighting each other very noisily．Several times oneknocked the otner off his horse，but then always fell off him-self．Alice got behind a tree，where she could watch moresafely．
　　‘What a noise their armour makes when they fall off！’shesaid to herself．‘And how calm the horses are！They just standthere like tables while the Knights get on and off！’
　　The battle ended when they both fell off at the same time．Then they shook hands and the Red Knight got on his horseand rode away．The White Knight came up to Alice．
　　‘I won that battle easily， didn't I？’he said．
　　‘I don't know，’said Alice，uncertainly．‘I don't want tobe anybody's prisoner． I want to be a Queen．’
　　‘So you will，when you've crossed the next brook，’ said theWhite Knight．‘I'll see you safe to the end of the wood- andthen I must go back， you know． That's the end of my move．’
　　‘Thank you very much，’said Alice．‘May I help you takeoff your helmet？’
　　It was difficult to do， but at last the helmet came off．
　　‘Ah， that's better，’ said the Knight．He pushed back hislong wild hair with both hands，and turned his gentle face andlarge sad eyes to Alice．
　　He was a very strange-looking soldier，Alice thought．Hisarmour fitted him very badly，and he had a great many thingsfastened to himself，and to the horse．There was also a smallwooden box on his back，which was upside-down.
　　‘I see you're looking at my little box，’the Knight said in afriendly voice．‘It's my own invention-to keep clothes andsandwiches in．You see I carry it upside-down，and then therain can't get in.’
　　‘But the things can get out，’ Alice said gently．‘Did youknow that the top was open？’
　　‘No，I didn't，’the Knight said．‘If all the things havefallen out，’he went on unhappily，‘there's no use keeping thebox．’He unfastened it as he spoke，and put it carefully on thebranch of a tree．‘Perhaps some birds will make a home in it．Now，if you're ready… What's that plate for？’
　　‘It was used for plum-cake，’said Alice．
　　‘I think we should take it with us，’the Knight said．‘It'llbe useful if we find any plum-cake．Help me to get it into thisbag．’
　　This took a long time to do because the bag was not reallybig enough and already had a lot of carrots in it．But at last itwas done，and they started walking through the forest．It wasa slow journey because the Knight was not a good rider． Everytime the horse stopped（which it did very often），he fell off infront．When the horse went on again， he fell off behind．Sometimes he fell off sideways as well，and Alice learnt not towalk too close to the horse．
　　‘Perhaps you should have a wooden horse，on wheels，’Al-ice said with a little laugh， as she helped him get back on hishorse for the seventh time．
　　‘Do you think so？’the Knight said seriously．‘Yes，I'll getone． One or two- several．’
　　As they went， the Knight told her about his many inven-tions．Alice listened with great interest，but found most ofthem hard to understand．She was thinking abut his inven-tion for turning fish eyes into buttons when she saw，to hersurprise，that they had reached the end of the forest．
　　‘You are sad，’the Knight said in a worried voice．‘Let mesing you a song to cheer you up．’
　　‘Is it very long？’ Alice asked．She felt that she had heard agreat many poems and songs that day．
　　‘It's long，’said the Knight，‘but it's very，very beautiful．Everybody that hears me sing it-either they cry，or-’ Hestopped suddenly．
　　‘Or what？’ said Alice．
　　‘Or they don't， you know．The song is called I'll tell youeverything I can．It's about an old， old man that I met onesummer evening long ago，while sitting on the grass．’
　　Years afterwads Alice could still remember very clearlythose strange moments- the Knight's gentle smile as hesang，the sunlight shining on his armour，the horse quietlymoving around， and the black shadows of the forest behind．
　　She stood and listened very carefully，but she did not cry．Itwas a sad song，certainly，and as the Knight came towards theend，he seemed lost in his own sad dreams．
　　And now，if accidentally I put
　　My fingers into glue，
　　Or try to pusn a right-hand foot
　　Into a left-hand shoe，
　　Or if I drop upon my toe
　　A very heavy glass，
　　I cry，as it reminds me so
　　Of that old man I used to know-
　　Whose face was kind，whose voice was slow，
　　Whose hair was whiter than the snow，
　　Who shook his body to and fro，
　　And whispered words both sad and low-
　　That summer evening long ago，
　　While sitting on the grass．
　　As the Knight sang the last words， he began to turn hishorse round to go back into the forest．
　　‘You've only a little way to go，’he said，‘down the hilland over the brook，and then you'll be a Queen．’
　　‘Thank you very much for coming so far，’said Alice，‘andfor the song-I liked it very much．’
　　‘I hope so，’the Knight said worriedly，‘but you didn't cryvery much．’
　　They shook hands，and then the Knight rode slowly awayinto the forest．Alice stood and watched him for a while．
　　‘It won't be long before he falls off again，’she said to her-self．‘Yes- there he goes！Right on his head as usual！ Buthe doesn't seem to mind a bit．’
　　When he had gone，Alice turned and ran down the hill．‘Now for the last brook，and to be a Queen！How grand itsounds！’A few steps brought her to the edge of the brook．
　　‘The Eighth Square at last！’she cried，as she jumped over
　　* * * * *
　　* * * *
　　* * * * *
　　and sat down to rest on the soft green grass． At once she feltsomething very heavy on her head．‘What is this on myhead？’she said．‘And how did it get there？’She lifted it off，to see what it was．
　　It was a golden crown．






■ 9 Queen Alice
　　‘Well， this is grand！’said Alice．She got up andwalked around for a while，but the crown feltvery heavy and strange，so she sat down again. Then she no-ticed that the Red Queen and the White Queen were now sit-ting on either side of her．How they had got there，she had noidea．But she was not at all surprised． Nothing could surpriseher now in the looking-glass world．
　　‘Now I am a Queen，’said Alice，‘does this mean that thegame of chess has finished，or-’
　　‘Speak when you're spoken to！’the Red Queen said．‘Think before you speak， and write it down afterwards．’
　　‘But I only-’Alice began·
　　‘And you can't be a Queen， ’the Red Queen went on，‘un-til you've done your lessons．’
　　‘Are you good at sums？’ the White Queen asked．‘What's one and one and one and one and one and one and one？’
　　‘I don't know，’said Alice．‘I lost count．But why-’
　　‘She can't do sums，’said the Red Queen．‘What about lan-guages？ And can you read？’
　　‘Of course I can read！’Alice said．‘And I know a littleFrench，but I really don't see why-’
　　‘It's clear，’said the White Queen，shaking her head sadly，‘that she wants to argue about something，but she doesn'tknow what to argue about！’
　　Alice decided it would be safer to say nothing， and for awhile there was silence． Then the Red Queen said to theWhite Queen，‘I invite you to Alice's party this afternoon．’
　　‘And I invite you，’the White Queen replied．‘But I musthave a rest first，’she went on．‘I am so sleepy．’
　　‘And so must I，’said the Red Queen．She looked at Alice．‘You can sing to us，to help us sleep．’
　　Then the two Queens put their heads against Alice's shoul-ders．In a moment they were both asleep，and snoring loudly．
　　After a while the snoring seemed to change and began tosound almost like music．Alice thought that she could evenhear some words. She listened hard， and suddenly she foundthat the Queens had disappeared， and she was standing infront of a tall and very grand-looking doorway．Above the doorwere the words QUEEN ALICE in large letters．
　　Alice knocked，and the door flew open．There seemed to behundreds of voices singing， and Alice could now hear thewords very clearly．They went like this：
　　Then fill up the glasses with everything nice，
　　And cover the table with buttons and rice．
　　Put cats in the coffee，and salt in the tea-
　　And welcome Queen Alice with thirty-times-three！
　　‘I suppose I should go in，’Alice said to herself．So in shewent，and at once everyone in the hall became silent．
　　As she walked down the long hall， she saw that there wereanimals， birds， and even a few flowers among the crowd seat-ed round the table. At the top there were three chairs； theRed and White Queens had taken two of them， but the middleone was empty． Alice sat down，feeling a little uncomfortableand wishing that someone would speak．
　　At last the Red Queen began．‘You've missed the fish．Bring the meat now！’And at once the waiters put a large jointof meat in front of Alice．
　　But before she could begin to cut up the joint， the RedQueen spoke again．‘Let me introduce you to the joint，’ shesaid．‘Alice-Meat．Meat-Alice．’
　　The joint of meat then stood up on the plate and curtsied toAlice．Alice，feeling both frightened and amused，picked upthe knife and fork．‘May I give you some meat？’she said，looking from one Queen to the other．
　　‘Certainly not！’the Red Queen said．‘It isn't polite to cutanyone you've been introduced to．Take away the joint！’
　　The waiters immediately carried away the joint，andbrought a large plum-pudding in its place．
　　‘Please don't introduce me to the pudding，’said Alicequickly，‘or we shall get no dinner at all．’
　　But the Red Queen said loudly，‘Pudding- Alice． Alice-Pudding．Take away the pudding！’And the waiters took itaway at once．
　　Then Alice decided to give an order herself．‘Waiter！Bringback the pudding！’When the pudding appeared again，shequickly cut off a piece and gave it to the Red Queen．
　　‘That's really friendly！’said the Pudding．‘How wouldyou like someone to cut a piece out of you？’
　　Alice was too surprised to speak．
　　‘Say something，’said the Red Queen．‘You can't leave allthe conversation to the pudding！’
　　By this time the party was beginning to get very noisy，andmore and more strange things were happening．Bottles andplates were now walking around on the table，arm in arm， andthe White Queen began to whisper in Alice's ear a long poemabout fishes．Then the Red Queen screamed at the top of hervoice，‘Let's drink to Queen Alice's health！’
　　Some of the animals put their glasses upside-down on theirheads，others got inside them or knocked them over on thetable．The forks began to dance with the spoons，and the noisegot wilder and wilder．The White Queen said in Alice's ear，‘You must stand up and give thanks now， you know．’
　　Alice stood up．‘I must stop all this！’she cried，and shetook hold of the table-cloth with both hands．One good pull，and everything came crashing down on the floor．
　　‘And now for you！’she went on， turning to the RedQueen，who had suddenly become very much smaller and wasrunning around on the table．‘You started all this trouble，and I'll shake you into a kitten！Yes，I will！’






■ 10 Shaking
　　She took the Red Queen off the table as she spoke，andshook her backwards and forwards， very hard．
　　The Red Queen did not try to fight or escape… but herface grew very small， and her eyes got large and green…and， as Alice went on shaking her， she grew shorter-andfatter-and softer- and rounder-and…






■ 11 Waking
　　…and it really was a kitten，after all.






■ 12 Who dreamed it？
　　‘You shouldn't be so noisy，Your Majesty，’Alicesaid to the black kitten．‘You've woken me outof a very nice dream． I've been all through the looking-glassworld．And I think that you were the Red Queen， weren'tyou？’
　　It is impossible to guess if a kitten is saying ‘yes’ or ‘no’．Alice looked among the chessmen on the table until she foundthe Red Queen．Then she sat on the carpet and put the kittenand the Queen to look at each other．
　　‘Curtsy while you're thinking what to say，’Alice said，with a little laugh．‘It saves time，remember！’
　　But the kitten turned its head away and wouldn't look at theQueen.
　　‘Now， Kitty，’Alice went on，‘who was it who dreamed itall，do you think？No，listen-don't start washing your pawsnow．You see，Kitty，it was either me or the Red King．Hewas part of my dream，of course-but then I was part of hisdream too！ Was it the Red King，Kitty？’
　　But the kitten began to wash its other paw，and pretended ithadn't heard the question．
　　Who do you think was dreaming？




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Wind in the Willow by Kenneth Grahame





■ 1 The river
　　The Mole worked very hard all morning, cleaning his little home. He brushed, and he washed; he cleaned the floors and the walls, he stood on chairs to wash the tops of cup boards, he got under the beds, he took up the carpets. He cleaned and he cleaned, until his arms and his back ached with tiredness.
　　It was springtime, and the smell and the sound of spring were everywhere, even in the Mole's dark little house under the ground. And with the spring comes the promise of change, of sunshine, of new green leaves. So it was not surprising that the Mole suddenly put down his brushes and said, 'Oh bother! 'and then, 'I'm tired of cleaning! 'Something up above the ground was calling to him, and he ran out of his house and began to dig his way upwards to the sun.
　　He dug and he pushed, and he pushed and he dug. 'Up we go! Up we go! 'he said to himself, until at last his nose came out into the sunlight, and he found himself in the warm grass of a field.
　　'This is fine! 'said the Mole. 'This is better than cleaning! 'The sunshine was warm on his back and the air was filled with the songs of birds. He gave a little jump for happiness, shook himself, and then began to cross the field towards some trees. Here and there he went, through the fields and the woods, looking and smelling and listening. Everywhere animals and birds were busy, talking and laughing, looking for food, making new homes for the spring. The Mole enjoyed it all.
　　Then, suddenly, he came to a river. He had never seen a river before in his life-this wonderful bright shining thing, which danced its way in and out of the shadows under the trees. It was never still for a minute, hurrying and laughing and talking to itself.
　　And at once, the Mole was in love with it. He walked along the river bank, listening and watching all the time. At last he sat down on the grass and looked across the river to the bank opposite. There was a dark hole in the bank, and the Mole watched it dreamily, thinking that it would be very pleasant to have a little house by the river. As he watched, he saw some thing shining in the hole. Soon he saw that it was an eye, and then a face appeared as well.
　　A brown little face, with whiskers.
　　With bright eyes, and small ears, and thick shiny hair.
　　It was the Water Rat!
　　Then the two animals stood up and looked at each other.
　　'Hello, Mole! 'said the Water Rat.
　　'Hello, Rat! 'said the Mole.
　　'Would you like to come over
' asked the Rat.
　　'Oh, it's easy to talk, 'said the Mole, a little crossly. The river was new to him and he did not know how to get to the other side.
　　The Rat said nothing, and disappeared. Then he appeared again, in a little blue and white boat, which came quickly across the river towards the Mole. It stopped by the bank, and a moment later the Mole, to his great surprise and excitement, found himself actually sitting in a real boat.
　　'Do you know, 'he said, as the Rat began to row away from the bank, 'I've never been in a boat before in all my life. '
　　'What
' cried the Rat. 'My dear fellow, you haven't lived! Believe me, 'he went on seriously, 'there is nothing-really nothing-nicer than just messing about in boats. You can go up river, down river, stay where you are, it really doesn't matter. There's always something to do, but you don't have to do it if you don't want to. You can do what you like. Look here! If you're not busy today, why don't we spend the day on the river together
'
　　The Mole had listened to all this with great interest. Now he sat back in the comfortable seat and said, 'What a wonderful day this is! Let's start at once! '
　　But first the Rat went into his hole, and after a while came out carrying a very large and heavy lunch basket. This went in to the boat, under the Mole's feet, and then the Rat began to row down river. The two friends talked from time to time, but mostly the Mole just watched the river dreamily, enjoying the sounds and the smells and the sunlight. At last they turned off the big river into a little side river that came down to join it. The Rat stopped the boat and they got out on to a bank of soft green grass under tall willow trees. It was very quiet and very peaceful.
　　The Mole sat down and looked around him. 'What a beautiful place! 'he said happily.
　　'Time for lunch, 'said the Rat, opening the basket. 'Come on, Mole! Let's get to work. '
　　The Mole was happy to obey, because he was very hungry indeed after all his cleaning earlier in the day. And what a lunch it was! There were cold meats and egg sandwiches, cooked chicken and tomatoes, apples and bananas and a large cake.
　　When at last they could eat no more, the Mole lay back and watched the river lazily. After a while he sat up.
　　'I can see a long line of bubbles in the water, 'he said. 'I wonder what it is. '
　　'Bubbles
 Oho! 'said the Rat, and he called out across the river in a friendly kind of way.
　　The bubbles stopped and turned. Soon a wet whiskery nose appeared above the edge of the bank, and the Otter pulled him self out and shook the water from his coat.
　　'A lunch party! 'he said, going straight towards the food. 'Why didn't you invite me, Ratty
'
　　'We didn't plan it, 'explained the Rat. 'We only decided to come this morning. Oh, and this is my friend, Mr Mole. '
　　'Happy to meet you, 'said the Otter, and the two animals were friends at once.
　　'All the world seems to be out on the river today, 'said the Otter while he ate. 'I came up this side river to try and get a moment's peace, and then I find you fellows having a lunch party! '
　　Suddenly there was a noise in the thick bushes behind them, and a big black and white head looked out at them.
　　'Come on, old Badger! 'shouted the Rat.
　　The Badger came forward a few steps, then stopped. 'Hmm! A crowd! 'he said crossly, and turned his back and disappeared again into the bushes.
　　'What a pity! 'said the Rat. 'Dear old Badger! He's a good fellow, but he does hate a crowd. We won't see him again today. But tell us, who's out on the river
'
　　'Toad's out, for one, 'replied the Otter. 'In his shiny new boat. He's got new boating clothes, and everything! '
　　The Rat and the Otter looked at each other and laughed.
　　'Toad's always trying something new, 'the Rat explained to the Mole. 'But he always gets bored so quickly. Last year it was a house-boat, and he wanted to spend the rest of his life living on the river. This year it's rowing-boats. '
　　'He's a nice fellow, of course, 'said the Otter. 'But he never learns from his mistakes! '
　　From where they sat they could see a bit of the big river. And just then they saw a rowing-boat going past, and in it a short fat animal, rowing very hard and very badly.
　　'There's Toad going past now, 'said the Rat. 'Look at him! He'll turn that boat over in a minute. '
　　'Of course he will, 'laughed the Otter. Toad had now disappeared up river, and the Otter went on, 'Did I ever tell you that story about Toad and the…'
　　There was a sudden movement in the water near the bank. Something silvery shone for a second, then it was gone. And so was the Otter. The Mole looked down. The Otter's voice was still in his ears, but the Otter had disappeared.
　　There was just a long line of bubbles in the river.
　　The Rat sang a little song to himself, and the Mole remembered that it was not at all polite, in the animal world, to say anything if your friends disappeared at any moment, for any reason.
　　'Well, well, 'said the Rat. 'I suppose we should think about getting home. '
　　The Mole packed the things away in the lunch basket, and soon the Rat began to row gently homewards while the after noon sun went down behind the trees. The Rat was dreaming quietly to himself, but the Mole was very full of lunch and the excitements of the day. He began to think that he knew every thing about boats now.
　　And in a while he said, 'Ratty! Pleas, I want to row! '
　　The Rat shook his head with a smile. 'Not yet, my young friend, 'he said. 'Wait until you've had a few lessons. It's not as easy as it looks. '
　　The Mole was quiet for a minute or two. But he wanted to row very much indeed. He was sure that he could row as well as Rat. Then, before the Rat could stop him, he jumped up, and pulled the oars out of the surprised Rat's hands. The Rat fell backwards off his seat, calling out, 'Stop it, you silly fellow! You'll have us in the river! '
　　The Mole made a great dig at the water with the oars, but the oars never touched the water at all. The Mole's legs flew up above his head, and he found himself lying on top of the Rat in the bottom of the boat. Frightened, he tried to get up, got hold of the side of the boat, and the next moment-splash!
　　Over went the boat, and the Mole and the Rat and the lunch basket were all in the water.
　　It was the Rat, of course, who pulled the Mole out of the water, who turned the boat right way up, who found the oars, who got the lunch basket from the bottom of the river. And he laughed and laughed.
　　When all was ready again, the unhappy Mole sat in the boat very wet and very miserable. As they left, he said in a low voice, 'Ratty, my dear friend! I have been so silly and so ungrateful. I really am very sorry indeed. '
　　'That's all right! 'replied the Rat kindly. 'I'm always in and out of the water myself, so don't worry about it. But I re ally think you should come and stay with me for a while. You'll be very comfortable, and I'll teach you to row and to swim. Soon you'll be as good a boatman as any of us. '
　　The Mole was almost too happy to speak and could find no words to thank his friend.
　　When they got home, they had a good hot supper in front of a bright fire while the Rat told exciting stories of life on the river. Then he took the Mole upstairs to the best bedroom, and soon the Mole was lying warm and comfortable, listening to the sound of his new friend the River running past his bedroom window.
　　That was the first of many wonderful days for the Mole, as the spring turned slowly into a golden summer. He learnt to swim and to row, and he learnt to love the sound of the wind when it went whispering its secrets through the trees and the plants by the river.






■ 2 The open road
　　One bright summer morning the Mole and the Rat were out on the river bank, watching the world go by. The Rat was writing a song and was singing quietly to himself as he tried different words.
　　'Ratty, 'said the Mole, 'could I ask you something
'
　　'Mmm, 'the Rat said, not really listening. 'Sky, fly, high, die, why…Oh dear! What did you say, Mole
'
　　'Will you take me to visit Mr Toad
 I've heard so much about him, and I do want to meet him. '
　　'Why, of course, 'said the Rat kindly. 'Get the boat out, and we'll row up there now. Toad's always happy to see his friends. '
　　'He must be a very nice animal, 'said the Mole, as he got into the boat and took the oars.
　　'He's the best of animals, 'replied the Rat. 'Kind, friendly-not very clever, perhaps, and sometimes he's just a little bit boastful, but he's a good fellow really. '
　　The Mole rowed hard up the river and in a while they came to a large red house, with beautiful gardens reaching down to the water's edge.
　　'There's Toad Hall, 'said the Rat. 'It's a lovely old house-Toad is very rich, you know, and this is really one of the nicest houses on the river. But we never say that to Toad, of course. '
　　They left their boat by the boathouse at the end of the gar den. The boathouse was full of expensive boats, which looked new and mostly unused.
　　The Rat looked around him. 'I see that all the boats are out of the water, 'he said. 'I suppose Toad has finished with boating now and has some new interest to amuse him. '
　　They walked over the grass towards the house and soon found Toad, resting in a garden-chair and carefully studying a large map.
　　'Wonderful! 'he cried, as he saw them. 'You're just the fellow that I wanted to see, Ratty. 'He jumped up and came towards them, talking all the time, and gave the Rat no time to introduce the Mole. 'I need you very much-both of you. You've got to help me. It's most important! '
　　'It's about your rowing, I suppose, 'said the Rat, keeping his face very serious. 'You will learn to do it in the end, you know, if you're patient and work hard and----'
　　'Oh, bother boats! 'the Toad said crossly. 'I've finished with boats. Silly way to pass the time. No, I've discovered the real thing-the best way, the only way, to spend one's life. Come with me, dear Ratty, and your kind friend too, and I will show you! '
　　He took them round to the other side of the house, and there they saw a shiny new gipsy caravan. It had yellow and green sides, and red wheels.
　　'There you are! 'cried the Toad. 'There's real life for you. The open road, the fields, the hills…villages, towns, cities! Here today, off to a different place tomorrow! Travel, change, interest-the world in front of you! '
　　The Mole was very interested and excited, and followed the Toad inside the caravan to look around. But the Rat shook his head and waited outside.
　　When they came down the steps again, the Toad was still talking excitedly to the Mole. 'So you see, everything is ready for when we start this afternoon. '
　　'What was that
' said the Rat slowly. 'Did you say“we”and “start”and“this afternoon”
'
　　'Now, dear good old Ratty, 'said Toad quickly, 'don't talk in that cross voice. You know you've got to come. You can't stay by your boring old river all your life. I want to show you the world! '
　　'I don't care, 'said the Rat calmly. 'I'm not coming, and that's final. I'm going to stay by my old river, and what's more, Mole's going to stay with me, aren't you, Mole
'
　　'Of course I am, 'said the Mole bravely. But his face looked sad. Poor Mole! He thought that life in a caravan on the open road would be an exciting adventure.
　　The Rat saw his sad face and felt worried. He liked his friends to be happy and he could see that the Mole really wanted to go.
　　Toad watched them both carefully. 'Come in and have some lunch, 'he said pleasantly, 'and we'll talk it over. '
　　During lunch-which was excellent, of course, because everything at Toad Hall always was-the Toad talked and talked. He was full of wonderful plans. How interesting each day would be! What adventures the three friends would have together! Ah, the happiness of the travelling life!
　　In the end, of course, the Rat agreed to go, and by the evening they found themselves on a lonely hillside miles from home. It had been a golden afternoon, and even the Rat had enjoyed the journey so far. Only the old grey horse was not very happy. He had to do all the hard work of pulling the caravan, and he was not at all pleased about it.
　　The next morning the Toad was still sleeping deeply when the other two got up. They shook him very hard but couldn't wake him, so they had to do all the work. The Rat took care of the horse, lit the fire, and did last night's washing-up. The Mole walked to the nearest village, a long way away, to get milk and eggs and bread, which the Toad had, of course, for gotten to bring. And when at last the Toad got up, he said what a pleasant easy life it was on the open road.
　　The day passed happily as they travelled over green hills and along narrow country roads. But the next morning the Rat and the Mole got Toad out of bed and made sure that he did some of the work. Because of this, Toad said very little about a pleas ant easy life. Later, he even tried to get back into bed, but the Mole and the Rat pulled him out again.
　　The end of their journey came very suddenly. In the after noon they were travelling along a big road. The Mole was walking beside the horse, and the Toad and the Water Rat were walking behind the caravan, talking together. Actually, the Toad was talking, and the Rat was listening-some of the time.
　　Then they heard a noise behind them, and looking back, they saw a small cloud of dust. It made a 'Poop-poop! 'sound, and it was coming towards them very fast indeed.
　　Seconds later, the peace of the afternoon was destroyed in a storm of noise and wind and dust. The' poop-poop' rang with a shout in their ears, and an enormous, long, shining motorcar roared past them and disappeared over the hill.
　　The old grey horse, wild with fear, tried to get off the road. The caravan's wheels began to go down into the ditch along the edge. Then there was a terrible crash-and the beautiful yellow and green caravan lay helplessly on its side.
　　The Rat jumped up and down in the road, shouting angrily. 'Stupid, dangerous people! The police should lock you up in prison! '
　　He and the Mole managed to calm the horse, and then they went to look at the caravan. Two wheels had come off, the windows were broken, and bits of wood lay everywhere. They tried to pull it out of the ditch, but they couldn't move it.
　　'Hi! Toad! 'they cried. 'Come and help us, can't you! '
　　The Toad never answered a word, so they went to see what was the matter with him. They found him sitting in the middle of the road, with a dreamy smile on his face and happily whispering, 'Poop-poop! '
　　The Rat shook him, not very gently. 'Are you coming to help us, Toad
' he asked crossly.
　　'Oh, what happiness! 'whispered Toad to himself. 'The real way to travel! The only way to travel! Here one minute-miles away in seconds! Wonderful! Poop-poop! '
　　'Oh, do stop being so silly, Toad! 'cried the Mole.
　　'And I never knew! 'the Toad went on dreamily. 'I never dreamt! What clouds of dust will fly up behind me as I drive like the wind! I've finished with silly old caravans for ever. Poop-poop! '
　　'What are we going to do with him
' the Mole asked the Water Rat.
　　'Nothing, 'replied the Rat. 'There's nothing that we can do. I know Toad. When he gets a new idea into his head, he al ways goes crazy at first. He'll be like this for some days now. Come on, we'll have to do everything by ourselves. '
　　They had to leave the caravan in the ditch and walk to the nearest town, five or six miles away. There they asked some body to take care of the horse, and found somebody who agreed to fetch the broken caravan. Then they caught a train to a station near Toad Hall, took Toad home, went down to the boat, and then at last they sat down to a late supper in Rat's comfortable little home by the river.
　　The next day was a lazy one. In the evening the Mole was sitting on the river bank fishing, when the Rat, who had been to visit friends, came to find him.
　　'Heard the news
' the Rat said. 'Everybody's talking about it, all along the river bank. Toad went up to town by an early train this morning. And he has ordered a large and very expensive motor-car. '






■ 3 The Wild Wood
　　The Mole had wanted for a long time to meet the Badger. He often spoke about his wish to the Water Rat, but the Rat didn't seem to want to do anything about it.
　　'It's all right, 'the Rat always said. 'Badger will come past one day, and then I'll introduce you. '
　　'Couldn't you invite him to dinner or something
' asked the Mole.
　　'He wouldn't come, 'said the Rat. 'He hates crowds, and parties, and dinners, and all that kind of thing. '
　　'Well then, shall we go and visit him
'
　　'Oh, no! , the Rat said. 'He's very shy, and he wouldn't like that at all. I know him very well, but I've never visited his home. And it's not really possible to go there, because he lives right in the middle of the Wild Wood. '
　　'You said you would tell me about the Wild Woo, 'said the Mole, 'but you never did. Aren't they-aren't they very nice people in there
'
　　'Well, 'said the Rat, 'the squirrels are all right, and the rabbits-most of them. And Badger, of course. He likes living there. And nobody gives him any trouble. '
　　'But who could give trouble
' asked the Mole.
　　'There are, well, others, 'the Rat went on slowly. 'Weasels…stoats…ferrets, and so on. They're all right in a way. Most of the time. But, well, you wouldn't want to turn your back to them in the dark, and that's a fact. Don't worry about Badger. He'll come along one day. '
　　But the summer passed and the Badger never came along.
　　Soon the days grew shorter, and the cold weather kept the animals inside their comfortable houses. The Rat slept a lot in the winter, going to bed early and getting up late. During his short day, he wrote songs and did small jobs in the house. And, of course, there were always animals calling in for a comfort able talk round the fire, telling stories and remembering the good times and the adventures of the past summer.
　　One afternoon, while the Rat was sleeping peacefully in front of the fire, the Mole decided to go out by himself and take a walk in the Wild Wood. 'Perhaps, 'he thought, 'I'll meet Mr Badger, and then I can introduce myself. '
　　It was a cold afternoon, with a hard grey sky. The Mole hurried along, enjoying the quietness of the winter day, and after a time he saw in front of him the black shape of the Wild Wood.
　　He was not at all frightened at first. It was a strange, dark place, but the Mole found that exciting. He went deeper and deeper into the wood, where the light was less and the trees grew close together. Everything was very still now, and the darkness seemed to come down quickly, shutting the Mole off from the outside world.
　　Then the faces began.
　　Out of the corner of his eye, the Mole thought that he saw a face looking at him from a hole a little narrow face, with hard unfriendly eyes. When he turned to look straight at it, the thing had disappeared.
　　He hurried on, telling himself not to be silly. He passed an other hole, and another, and-yes! Eyes were looking at him, then disappearing again into the darkness. Soon, every hole had a face, which watched him with eyes full of hate.
　　The Mole felt he had to get away from these faces. He turned off the path and hurried into the thickest part of the wood.
　　Then the whistling began.
　　It was soft, and far behind him, when he first heard it. Then it seemed to come from in front of him, more loudly. The Mole stopped and listened, then went on again. He was trying hard to stay calm, but his heart was beating very fast. He was alone, and far from help, and the night was coming down quickly.
　　Then the pattering began.
　　At first he thought it was only falling leaves, but then the noise grew louder and nearer, and the Mole knew what it was. It was the sound of little feet running-behind him, in front of him, on all sides of him. All the wood seemed to be alive, running, following, chasing something-or somebody. The frightened Mole began to run too, but he did not know where. He ran into trees and bushes, he fell over things and into things, he picked himself up and ran on. At last he found a deep dark hole in the bottom of an old tree and fell into it, too tired to run another step. He lay there, shaking with fear, and listened to the whistlings and the patterings outside. Now he understood why the Rat did not want to talk about it, and why other small animals from the fields and the river bank never came here. Be cause now, the Mole had felt it himself-the Terror of the Wild Wood.
　　All this time the Rat, warm and comfortable, was sleeping in front of his fire. When he woke up, he looked round for his friend, but the Mole was not there. He called out' Moly! 'several times, and when he heard no answer, he got up and went out into the hall.
　　The Mole's hat was missing, and so were his boots.
　　The Rat left the house and looked around. The ground was soft from rain, and he could see clearly which way the Mole had gone-straight towards the Wild wood.
　　The Rat stood thinking for a moment, looking very serious. Then he went back into the house, took a gun and a thick heavy stick, and hurried away across the fields.
　　Inside the wood it was nearly dark, and the whistling and the pattering began almost at once. But when the faces in the holes saw the Rat's gun and his thick heavy stick, they disappeared immediately, and everything became still and quiet. Patiently, the Rat began to search the wood from end to end, calling all the time, 'Moly, Moly! Where are you
 It's me-it's old Rat! '
　　At last, to his great happiness, he heard a little answering cry, and soon he found the Mole in his hiding-place in the tree.
　　'Oh, Ratty! 'cried the Mole. 'I'm so pleased to see you! I've been so frightened, I can't tell you! '
　　'I can understand that, 'said the Rat kindly. 'You see, Mole, it's really not a good idea to come here alone. We river bankers always come in twos or threes, if we have to come here. Of course, if you're Badger or Otter, then there's no problem. '
　　'Surely the brave Mr Toad is happy to come here alone, isn't he
' asked the Mole.
　　'Old Toad
' said the Rat, laughing loudly. 'He doesn't put his nose inside the Wild Wood-much too frightened! '
　　The Mole felt a little happier when he heard this, but he was still too tired to start the journey home. So he lay down to sleep under some dry leaves, while the Rat sat next to him, patiently waiting.
　　The Mole woke up feeling much better, and ready to leave. The Rat put his head out of the entrance of the hole, and then the Mole heard him say, 'Oh dear, oh dear! '
　　'What's the matter, Ratty
' asked the Mole.
　　'Snow, 'replied the Rat. 'It's snowing hard. But we can't stay here all night-it's too cold, and too dangerous. We'll just have to start walking, and hope. The trouble is, I don't really know where we are, and in the snow everything looks so different. '
　　It did indeed. The white blanket of snow covered everything, hiding the paths, changing the shapes of the trees and bushes. An hour later, they were wet, cold, aching with tiredness, and had no idea where they were.
　　They sat down for a rest and were moving on again when the Mole gave a sudden cry and fell forward on his face.
　　'Oh, my leg! 'he cried. 'I've hit my leg on something really hard. '
　　'Let's have a look, 'said the Rat, sitting down beside him. 'That's a very deep cut, 'he said, surprised. 'I wonder what…'Suddenly, he got up and began to dig in the snow.
　　'What are you doing, Ratty
' said the Mole.
　　The Rat just went on digging. Then he found something, and immediately began to dance round it excitedly.
　　'Look at this, Mole! 'he shouted. 'Just look at this! '
　　The Mole looked. Then he looked at his fried. 'It's a doors-craper. Why get excited about a door-scraper
'
　　'Don't you understand, you silly animal
' cried the Rat.
　　'I understand that somebody's been very careless, leaving a door-scraper lying in the middle of the Wild Wood, for other people to fall over. And when I get home----'
　　'Oh, dear, oh dear! 'cried the Rat. 'Just stop arguing, and dig! Or do you want to spend all night in the snow
'
　　The Mole did what he was told, although he thought his friend was going crazy. The two animals dug and dug, and after ten minutes' hard work they were successful.
　　The Mole had thought that they were digging into a snow bank, but now he saw that there was a door under the snow. A green door, with a long bell-pull beside it, and a name on it in big letters which said:
　　MR BADGER
　　The Mole fell backwards on the snow in surprise. 'Oh, Rat! 'he cried. 'How clever you are! And how stupid I am! '
　　'Never mind all that, 'said the Rat. 'Just get up and pull on that bell, while I knock on the door. '
　　The Rat banged on the door with his stick, and the Mole pulled. And from somewhere far under the ground they could just hear the sound of a deep, slow bell.






■ 4 A meeting with Mr Badger
　　They waited patiently for a very long time, jumping up and down in the snow to keep warm. At last they heard feet coming slowly towards the door. Then the door opened, just enough to show a long nose and pair of sleepy eyes.
　　'And who, 'said a deep, angry voice, 'is making visits at this time of night
'
　　'Oh, Badger, 'cried the Rat, 'let us in, please. It's me, Rat, and my friend Mole, and we're lost in the snow. '
　　'What
' said the Badger, in a very different voice. 'My dear Ratty! Lost in the snow, and in the Wild Wood! Come in at once, both of you, and get yourselves warm. '
　　That was a wonderful moment for the Mole and the Rat, when they heard the door close behind them, shutting out the Wild Wood. They followed the Badger down long dark tunnels until they came into a large kitchen. There was a bright fire, with comfortable armchairs round it, and a great wooden table with long seats.
　　'This is not the kind of night for small animals to be out, 'the Badger said, in a fatherly way. 'Sit yourselves down by the fire, while I get you some supper. '
　　Soon the Mole and the Rat were warm and dry, and the dangers of the Wild Wood seemed a long way away, like a bad dream. Then supper arrived. It was enough for ten small hungry animals, and the Rat and the Mole realized just how hungry they were. When at last they could eat no more, they sat with the Badger round the fire, and told him the story of their adventures.
　　Then the Badger said, 'Now then! Tell me the news from your part of the world. How's old Toad getting on
'
　　'He's going from bad to worse, 'said the Rat sadly. 'He had another crash only last week, and a bad one. You see, he thinks he's a wonderful driver, the best in the world. But he isn't. He's terrible! But he won't take lessons, he won't lis ten to anyone. '
　　'How many has he had
' the Badger asked.
　　'Crashes, or motor-cars
' asked the Rat. 'Well, with Toad, it's the same thing. This is the seventh car, and the seventh crash. His garage is full to the roof with bits of broken motor car! '
　　'He's been in hospital twice, 'the Mole added. 'The police have arrested him for dangerous driving three or four times. And he's spending so much money! '
　　'That's another problem, 'the Rat went on. 'Toad's rich, we all know that; but his money won't last for ever. Sooner or later, one of two things will happen. He'll kill himself in a crash, or he'll have no money left at all. Badger! We're his friends-can't we do something
'
　　The Badger thought for a while. 'You know, don't you, that I can't do anything now
' he said at last.
　　'No, no, of course not, 'the Rat and the Mole said together. Everybody knew that in the animal world the winter was a time for rest and sleep. Nobody wanted to do anything important or tiring.
　　'Very well, 'continued the Badger. 'But when the days are longer and warmer, then we'll do something. We-you and me and our friend the Mole here-we'll try to teach Toad a lesson. We won't listen to any silliness. We'll bring him back to reason, and turn him into a sensible Toad at last. But now, it's time for bed. Don't hurry tomorrow morning-come for breakfast as late as you want! '
　　The two tired animals slept long and deeply, and came down to breakfast very late indeed. In the kitchen they found two young hedgehogs, busy with bowls of bread and hot milk.
　　'Hello! 'said the Rat pleasantly. 'Where did you two come from
 Lost your way in the snow, I suppose
'
　　'Yes, sir, 'said one of the hedgehogs politely. 'We got lost on the way to school, and Mr Badger said we could come in and have some breakfast. '
　　The breakfast things were all ready on the table, and the Mole and the Rat quickly got to work. The Rat made the coffee while the Mole fried several pieces of bread and an enormous number of eggs.
　　When the door bell rang, one of the hedgehogs went to answer the door. He came back followed by the Otter, who gave a shout of happiness when he saw the Rat. He ran across the room and almost knocked the Rat off his chair.
　　'Get off! ' said the Raf, with his mouth full of fried bread.
　　'I thought I'd find you here all right, 'said the Otter happily. ' Everybody along the river bank has been so worried about you. Rat never came home last night, and nor did Mole; something terrible has happened, they said. But if anyone's in trouble, Badger usually gets to hear about it, so I came straight here this morning. And oh my, didn't the Wild Wood look grand, with the snow everywhere and the red sun coming up, shining through the black trees! Halfway here I met one of those silly rabbits. He told me that Mole had lost his way last night, and that “They” were out and chasing him all over the wood . I' d like to meet one of “Them” myself this morning, and tell them what I think. '
　　' Weren' t you at all—um－afraid
 asked the Mole, remembering how frightened he had been.
　　' Afraid
' The Otter laughed and showed this strong white teeth. ' I don' t think any of them would argue with me. Here, Mole, be a good fellow and fry me some eggs. I' m terribly hungry, and I've got a lot to talk about with Ratty here. Haven't seen him for weeks. '
　　Breakfast was almost finished when the Badger entered, looking sleepy. ' It' s nearly time for lunch, ' he said. ' Stay and have some with us, Otter. You must be hungry this cold morning. '
　　The hedgehogs were sent home, the breakfast things were cleared away, and soon the four animals sat down to lunch together. The Rat and the Otter were having a long conversation about river-bank matters, so the Mole began to talk to the Badger.
　　' This is a wonderful, comfortable home you have here, ' he said. ' There' s really nothing better than a place underground like this. You can shut off the world up there when you don't want it. And when you do, you can just go up and there' s the world waiting for you. '
　　The Badger smiled warmly at him. ' That' s just what I say, ' he replied. ' Down here, you' re safe and dry and warm. With a house above ground, you' ve got to worry about fire, and wind and rain, holes in the roof and broken windows. No, above ground is fine in its way, but one' s home should be underground. '
　　The Mole agreed with everything that the Badger said. His own little home was underground, so it was natural for him to feel comfortable there. He and the Badger became very friendly, and after lunch the Badger took him all round his home, down tunnel after tunnel, through room after room. The Mole was interested in everything and thought it was all wonderful. '
　　When they got back to the kitchen, the Rat was walking up and down, very restless. Unlike the Mole, he didn' t really feel comfortable underground. He wanted to be back in his own home, where the windows looked out over the river, and where he could hear the wind whispering through the trees.
　　' Come along, Mole, ' he said. ' We must get off while it's daylight. We don't want to spend another night lost in the Wild Wood. '
　　' It' s all right, ' said the Otter. ' I' m coming with you and I know all the paths. '
　　'You mustn' t worry, Ratty, ' added the Badger calmly. ' My tunnels go further than you think, and I' ve several back doors at the edge of the wood-although I keep them secret from most people. '
　　So the journey home was really very easy. When they came out of the Badger's secret back door, they found a path across the fields and soon they could see the river in front of them. The Mole looked back at the Wild Wood for a moment, thinking of the terror that he had felt there. Then he hurried on after the others, happy to be back in the open fields, and looking forward to the bright firelight of home.






■ 5 A lesson for Mr Toad
　　Winter passed, and spring returned to the river bank. Then came a fine morning in early summer, when the world seemed full of sunlight and new green leaves. Down by the river bank, the Mole and the Water Rat were hard at work, mending and cleaning boats, looking for lost oars, and getting ready for a summer on the river. Then they went in to breakfast and had nearly finished when they heard a heavy knock on the door.
　　The Mole went to see who it was, and came back with a very surprised face. ' Mr Badger' he said.
　　This was a wonderful thing indeed, for the Badger to come and visit them. He came into the room and stood looking at them, very seriously. The Rat dropped his egg-spoon, and sat open-mouthed.
　　'The hour has come! 'said the Badger at last.
　　'What hour
' asked the Rat worriedly, looking at the clock on the wall.
　　' Whose hour, you mean, 'replied the Badger. ' Why, Toad's hour! The hour of Toad! I said I would teach him a lesson when the summer came, and I'm going to begin today. '
　　' Toad's hour, of course! 'cried the Mole. ' I remember now. We'll teach him to be a sensible Toad! '
　　'I learnt last night, ' continued the Badger, ‘ that another new and very fast motor-car has just arrived at Toad Hall. You two must come with me immediately, and we will save Toad from this madness. '
　　' Right! ' cried the Rat, jumping up. ' Let's go at once. '
　　When they reached Toad Hall, they saw the new motor-car in front of the house. It was long, shiny, and bright red-Toad's favourite colour. Then Toad himself came down the steps in an enormous overcoat, hat and driving goggles.
　　' Hello, you fellows! 'Toad called. 'Come for a drive. You're just in time to…to…'
　　He saw his friends' serious faces and stopped.
　　The Badger walked up the steps. ' Come inside the house, Toad, 'he said. 'We have to talk to you. '
　　The three of them took Toad inside and shut the door.
　　'Now, ' the Badger said to Toad, 'first of all, take off those silly driving-clothes. '
　　'No, I won't! ' replied Toad. ' What is the meaning of this
 Explain yourself at once! '
　　'Take his things off, you two, ' ordered the Badger.
　　It wasn't easy to do. The Rat had to sit on Toad, while the Mole pulled off his overcoat, hat and goggles . And Toad called them some very unpleasant names while this was going on. But when he stood up again, he seemed more like himself, the Toad that they had always known.
　　' You knew this would happen one day, Toad, ' explained the Badger. 'We've warned you so many times, and you haven' t listened. You're spending all your money, you're al-ways in trouble with the police, and you drive like a madman. You will come with me into the next room, and there you will hear some facts about yourself. And you will come out a different Toad. '
　　He took Toad into a room off the hall and closed the door. The Rat shook his head.
　　' We won't save Toad by just talking to him, ' he said. 'He'll say anything— and then just go and do what he likes. '
　　After about an hour the door opened, and a very sad and sorry Toad came out, followed by the Badger.
　　' My friends, ' said the Badger, looking pleased, ' I' am happy to tell you that Toad now realizes how silly he has been. He has promised never to get into a motor-car again. '
　　'That is very good news, ' said the Mole seriously.
　　'Very good indeed, 'the Rat said, watching Toad's face carefully.
　　'Now, Toad, ' continued the Badger, 'I'd like you to repeat your promise in front of your friends. '
　　There was a long, long silence.
　　' No! ' said Toad suddenly. ' No, I won't. I'm not sorry, and I haven't been silly at all. It was all wonderful! And I won't promise anything! '
　　'What
' cried the Badger. 'But in there you told me—'
　　'Yes, yes, I know, 'said Toad quickly. ' You argue so beautifully, dear Badger, and I can't stop myself agreeing with you. But I' ve been thinking about it. I love driving, I' m a wonderful driver, and I promise you I' ll go on driving for ever! Poop-poop! '
　　' I told you so, didn' t I
 ' the Rat said to the Mole.
　　' Very well, ' said the Badger . ' If you won' t listen to reason, we' ll have to try another way. We' re going to stay with you in your house until you become sensible. Take him upstairs, you two, and lock him in his bedroom, '
　　So Toad, fighting and shouting, was pulled upstairs by his two friends.
　　' It' s for your own good, Toady, you know, ' said the Rat kindly. ' We' ll all have good times together again soon, when this—this madness has passed. '
　　' We' ll take good care of you, Toad, ' added the Mole. ' No more trouble with the police. No more crashes, and weeks in hospital, '
　　Then began a very tiring few weeks for the three friends. Day and night they guarded Toad , and one of them was always with him. They talked to him and tried to amuse him, hoping that he would forget his motor-car madness.
　　But Toad did not seem to get better. He often put the bed-room chairs together to look like a motor-car. Then he sat in the front one and pretended to drive, making terrible engine noises all the time. His friends tried to interest him in other things, but Toad just became sad and silent.
　　One day the Rat was the guard for the morning. He went upstairs and found Toad still in bed, ' How are you today, old fellow
' he asked brightly.
　　A sad whisper came from me bed, ' Thank you so much, dear Ratty! But how are you, and the excellent Mole, and dear old Badger
'
　　' Fine, fine, ' replied the Rat. ' Badger and Mole, ' he added, perhaps not very sensibly, ' have gone out for a run round. They' ll be out until lunch-time, so you and I will spend a pleasant morning together. '
　　' I don' t want you to trouble yourself about me, ' Toad said, in a sad little voice. ' I was wondering if you would go down to the village and fetch the doctor. But no, it' s not important. It' s probably too late by now. '
　　' Are you feeling ill, Toad
 What’s the matter
 '
　　' I don't know… I think my heart… But you mustn' t be sad, Ratty. Dear, kind friend… I have enjoyed knowing you so much… hate to say goodbye…' Toad' s whisper became slower and slower, and then stopped.
　　The Rat felt very worried. Toad lay so still and quiet—perhaps he really was ill. The Rat wished that the other two were not so far away. What should he do
 He looked again at the still and silent Toad, and decided that he must get th doctor at once. He hurried out, carefully locking the door behind him, and ran off to the village as fast as he could.
　　When Toad heard the front door bang, he jumped out of bed, laughing loudly. He quickly put on his best suit and filled his pockets with money. Then he took the sheets off the bed, tied them together, and in minutes he had climbed down from the bedroom window and was running across the garden to-wards the fields.
　　A few hours later he was a long way from home. As he walked happily along the road, he felt very pleased with him-self. ' A clever piece of work, that was! he boasted to the trees and the fields. ' Poor old Ratty! A good fellow, but not very intelligent. Badger will be so angry with him! '
　　Soon he came to a small town and decided to have lunch in the pub there. He was very hungry after his long walk. Halfway through his meal, he heard a sound that he knew very well indeed. Poop-poop! The car stopped outside and the people in it came into the pub to have lunch.
　　Shaking with excitement, Toad paid his bill and hurried out. He walked slowly round the car, looking at it lovingly. Every-body was having lunch and the street was empty.
　　' I wonder, ' Toad said to himself, ' I wonder if this kind of car starts easily
'
　　It started very easily, and Toad found himself in the driver' s seat. He did not know how it happened, but a minute later he was driving out of the town, forgetting right and wrong, for-getting everything except this wonderful, beautiful madness.
　　Faster and faster he drove, singing and laughing, as the car ate up the miles. Once again he knew that he was Toad-Toad the dreamer, Toad the adventurer, Toad the terror of the open road!
　　' You are a dangerous criminal, ' said the Judge. ' You stole a valuable motor-car, and you drove like a madman. It' s surprising that you didn' t kill somebody. And finally, you were very rude indeed to the police when they arrested you. Because of all this, I am sending you to prison for twenty years. Guards! Take the prisoner away! '
　　And so, shouting and crying, Toad was taken away. He was taken to an old dark castle, pushed into the smallest and darkest room below the ground, and the door was locked behind him.






■ 6 Toad' s adventures
　　For weeks Toad refused to eat. He lay on the floor of his prison and cried and cried. ' This is the end of every-thing, ' he said miserably, ' I shall never again be a popular and good-looking Toad, a rich and important Toad, a free and happy Toad. All my friends will forget even the name of Toad! '
　　But the keeper of the prison had a daughter, and she had a very kind heart. She often came to visit Toad, bringing him nice things to eat, and hot drinks. She asked him questions about his home and his old life, and because Toad loved to talk about himself, it wasn' t long before he began to sit up and answer her questions. He also realized how hungry he was, and so he ate and drank the things that she brought. And after a few days of this kindness, Toad was as loud and boastful as he had always been.
　　One morning the girl seemed very serious. ' Listen, Toad, 'she said, ' I have an aunt who is a washerwoman. '
　　' You mustn' t worry about it, ' said the Toad kindly. ' I have several aunts who ought to be washerwomen. '
　　' Don' t talk so much, Toad, ' said the girl. 'Now listen, I think I have a plan. ' And here she whispered in the Toad' s ear.
　　' What
 ' cried Toad. ' Me—dress as an old washer woman
 Impossible! '
　　'All right then, ' said the girl crossly. ' You can stay in prison for the next twenty years, you ungrateful animal! '
　　'No, no, 'said Toad quickly. 'You are a good , kind, clever girl, and I am just a stupid toad. I shall be very happy indeed to meet your excellent aunt. '
　　The next evening a little business was done in the Toad's prison. Several gold coins left the Toad's pocket and disappeared into the washerwoman's purse. Soon afterwards Toad began to climb up the stairs towards the castle entrance. He was wearing an old cotton dress and a black bonnet, and carrying a large basket of washing. And his heart was beating very fast indeed.
　　He passed the guards, who called out a friendly 'good night' to him, and soon Toad was walking through the streets of the town. He was free! Wild with excitement, he found his way to the railway station—and then came the first problem. He had no money to buy a ticket. His wallet, his keys, his watch-everything was in the pockets of his coat, lying on the prison floor.
　　He had to get away from this town as quickly as he could. But how could he do it
 He walked along beside one of the trains until he came to the engine. Then he stood there, crying and looking up at the engine-driver.
　　'Hey! ' called the driver. 'What's the matter, old lady
'
　　'Oh, sir! ' said Toad. ' I'm a poor unhappy washerwoman, and I've lost all my money, and I must get home tonight. ' ' Come on, then, ' said the engine-driver kindly. 'Jump up, and you can have a free ride. But don't tell anyone! '
　　So far everything was going well for Toad. The train hurried through the night, taking him away from the hateful prison. But Toad's luck didn't last for long.
　　There came a moment when the engine-driver put his head out of the window and looked back.
　　'That's strange, ' he said. 'There's a train behind us, coming up very fast. I can see it in the moonlight. I think they're chasing us! I wonder what…' And then the engine-driver gave Toad a long hard look.
　　So Toad had to tell the true story of his crime and his escape. The engine-driver looked very serious. He thought for a bit, then said, 'I don't like policemen telling me what to do. And I don' t like to see an animal crying. So cheer up, Toad! This is what we' ll do. In a mile or two the train goes through a wood. I'll slow down there, and you'll be able to jump off the train and get away in the dark. '
　　Half an hour later both trains had disappeared into the night, and Toad was hiding under some dead leaves in the middle of a strange wood. There, he fell asleep and didn't open his eyes again until early morning. He woke up cold and hungry-but still free!
　　His next adventure was with a barge on a canal. He had walked out of the wood and found a road, which after a while began to run along the side of a canal. Toad liked the idea of getting a free ride, so when he saw the barge coming along the canal, he quickly jumped from the canal bank on to the end of the barge. Then the barge-woman turned and saw him. Toad was ready with his story.
　　'I'm a poor unhappy washerwoman, ' he began.
　　But the barge-woman, Toad quickly discovered, was a most unpleasant person. She came up to Toad and looked hard at his face under his bonnet. ' Washerwoman indeed! You' re a fat lazy little toad, that' s what you are! ' she said rudely. 'Get off my barge! ' And she actually pushed Toad off the barge into the canal.
　　Toad swam to the bank and climbed out. He was wildly angry. How could he punish this rude and terrible person
 Then he saw the horse which was pulling the barge, and an idea came to him.
　　Two minutes later he was riding the horse across the fields away from the canal. Behind him, the barge-woman was shouting and screaming angrily. Toad rode on, laughing at his own great cleverness.
　　Later that morning he met a man with a caravan, who was cooking over a fire in a field. Toad sold him the barge-woman's horse for a good price and a hot breakfast. He ate and ate until he was almost too full to move . But he still had a long way to go to get home, so he got up and went on. The sun was shining brightly, his clothes were dry again, and the new coins made a pleasant sound in his pocket. He took off the bonnet, which was too hot, and began to think about all his adventures and escapes.
　　'Ho, ho! ' he said to himself. 'What a clever Toad I am! How brave! How intelligent! No problem is too difficult for Toad! ' He began to sing a song about himself as he walked along, although there was no one to hear it. It was perhaps the most boastful song that any animal ever sang.
　　If there's a need the world to save,
　　Then send for Mr Toad!
　　There's none so clever, none so brave,
　　As famous Mr Toad!
　　There was a lot more of it, and it got more and more boastful as it went on.
　　He came to a road and began to walk along it, hoping for an-other free ride. After a time he saw a small cloud of dust coming up the road behind him, and he heard the noise, that beautiful noise, of a motor-car. He stood in the middle of the road and when the car saw him, it began to slow down.
　　And then a terrible thing happened. Toad recognized the car and the people in it. And what is worse, the people recognized Toad.
　　'It's the car thief! ' they shouted. 'The criminal who has escaped from prison! Stop him! Catch him! '
　　Toad turned and ran. He picked up his skirts and ran faster than he had ever run in his life. But the people from the car were now running after him, shouting and screaming at him to stop. They chased him through a wood, across fields, up a hill, and down into a valley. Once Toad looked back and saw that two policemen had joined the chase. He tried to run even faster, but he was a fat animal and his legs were short, and the people were catching up with him.
　　On and on he ran. He was now among tall trees, and again he looked behind him. At that moment the land disappeared beneath his feet, and, splash! he found himself in deep water, cold water, fast-moving water. In his terror, he had run straight into a river!
　　And away the river took him, pushing him along, first on one side, then on the other. The cotton dress tied itself round his legs, trying to pull him under, and Toad had to fight to keep his head above water.
　　'Oh my! ' cried poor Toad. ' I'll never look at another motorcar for the rest of my life! '
　　At last he managed to catch hold of some water plants by the river bank. He held on, too tired to pull himself out of the water. Then he saw something bright in a dark hole in the bank. It moved towards him, and became a face.
　　Brown and small, with whiskers.
　　It was the Water Rat!






■ 7 Return to Toad Hall
　　The Rat got hold of Toad's neck, pulled him out of the water, and took him into his hall.
　　'Oh Ratty! ' cried Toad. 'I've done so many wonderful things since I last saw you! The dangers that I've been in! I was put in prison-escaped, of course! Pushed into a canal-swam safely away! Stole a horse- sold it for a lot of money! Oh, I am a clever Toad, and—'
　　'Toad, ' said the Water Rat, very seriously, 'stop boasting! Go, upstairs at once, wash yourself, and put on some of my clothes. I've never seen anything as wet and dirty as you are. '
　　Toad went upstairs a little crossly, but he was pleased to get out of the washerwoman's dress. He came down very clean and tidy, and ready to tell the Rat all about his adventures- how clever, how brave, how successful he had been . The Rat gave him lunch, and listened, unsmiling, while Toad talked and talked and talked. When at last he finished, the Rat looked up .
　　'I have to tell you, Toad, ' he said slowly, 'that I feel ashamed— yes, ashamed, to have a criminal, an escaped prisoner, for my friend . Can' t you see that none of this is exciting or amusing
 '
　　There was a little silence. Then Toad said sadly, 'You' re right, Ratty. Of course you are. How silly and boastful I have been! I shall become a quiet, sensible Toad from now on. In a while I'll walk down to Toad Hall and—'
　　‘Walk down to Toad Hall
' cried the Rat. 'What are you talking about
 Haven't you heard 
'
　　'Heard what
' said Toad, looking frightened. 'Quick, Ratty, tell me! What haven't I heard
'
　　'About the Wild Wooders! ' cried the Rat. 'The Stoats and the Weasels and the Ferrets- they've taken Toad Hall! When you were sent to prison, they came out of the Wild Wood one dark night and broke into the Hall. They've been living there ever since— eating your food, drinking your drink, giving wild parties. They've got guns and knives and sticks, and they keep guards round the house night and day. They say they' re going to stay there for ever. '
　　At first Toad couldn't believe it. But he had gone up to Toad Hall, and two ferrets in the garden had laughed at him, and the stoats who were guarding the walls had shot at him. Toad dropped flat in the road and the bullet passed over his head. He went back, very unhappy, to the Water Rat.
　　That night there was a meeting in the Rat's house. The Mole and the Badger came, to talk about plans to take back Toad Hall from the Wild Wooders.
　　When they came in and saw Toad, the Badger shook his head sadly. ' Poor Toad! This is not a happy home-coming for you.
　　But the Mole was very pleased to see him. 'Here's old Toad! ' he cried. 'How did you manage to escape from prison
It was very clever of you to do that. '
　　' Clever
　　'No, you don't! ' said the Mole. 'I know what Toad should do. He should—'
　　'Well, I'm not going to! ' cried Toad, getting excited. 'I'm not taking orders from you fellows! It's my house that we're talking about and—'
　　By now they were almost shouting at each other, when suddenly a deep low voice came from an armchair.
　　'Be quiet at once, all of you! ' said the Badger. 'And listen. The Mole and I have been watching Toad Hall. The stoats, with their guns, are on guard all round the walls, and they're very good guards too. We can't attack the place from outside. They're too strong for us. '
　　' Then there's no hope, ' cried Toad miserably. 'I shall go and join the army or something, and never see my dear Toad Hall again! '
　　'Cheer up, Toady, ' said the Badger, 'because now I'm going to tell you a very great secret. '
　　Toad sat up, interested. He loved secrets, although he could never keep them.
　　'There- is- an -underground- tunnel, ' said the Badger slowly, 'which goes from the river bank near here, right up into the middle of Toad Hall. '
　　' Don't be silly, Badger! cried Toad. ' Of course there isn't! I know Toad Hall, inside and outside, and—'
　　' My young friend, ' said the Badger calmly, ' your father—who was a great friend of mine— told me many things that he didn't tell you. “ Don't tell my son about this tunnel, ” he said to me. “ He's a good boy, but he talks far too much. ”'
　　Toad opened his mouth to argue, and then decided not to .
　　'I asked Otter, ' continued the Badger, ' to do some spy work for us. He pretended to be a gardener and went to the back door of the Hall, asking for work. During the conversation he learnt that tomorrow night there will be a big birthday par-ty— the Chief Weasel's, I think— in the dining-hall. All the weasels will be there, eating and drinking and laughing, and making a lot of noise. '
　　' But the stoats will still be on guard on the walls, ' said the Rat.
　　'True, 'agreed the Badger. 'But the weasels, you see, know that, so they won't have any guns or sticks with them at the party. And the tunnel comes up into that little room right next to the dining-hall. We only have to—'
　　'—run into the dining-hall—' cried the Mole.
　　'—with our guns and sticks and knives —'shouted the Rat.
　　'—and chase them and beat them and hit them! 'cried the Toad, greatly excited. He ran round and round the room, jumping over the chairs.
　　‘ Very well, then, ' said the Badger, sitting back comfortably and opening his newspaper. 'That is the plan, and there's nothing more for you to argue about. '
　　All the next day the Rat hurried about, getting the guns and the knives and the sticks ready. Once the Badger lifted his head from the newspaper.
　　'We shan't need guns or knives, Ratty, 'he said. 'We four, with our sticks, will clear the dining-hall in five minutes. I could do it by myself. '
　　'Better to be safe than sorry, ' said the Rat.
　　At last the evening came, and the four friends went quietly along the river bank to find the entrance to the secret tunnel. Toad, of course, managed to fall in the river and his friends had to pull him out. The tunnel was cold, and wet, and dark, and narrow. Poor Toad got frightened and ran into the Rat by mistake, who then nearly knocked the Mole over. All this made a lot of noise, and the Badger, who was in front with the lantern, turned round.
　　' If Toad can't keep quiet, ' he whispered angrily, 'I'll leave him here alone in the dark! '
　　After that, the Toad kept very quiet.
　　They could hear the noise of the party while they were still underground. Silently, they pushed open the door in the roof of the tunnel, and climbed up into the small room next to the dining-hall. Now they could hear one of the weasels singing a very rude song about Toad the car-thief.
　　'Just wait until I get my hands on him! ' Toad whispered angrily, showing his teeth.
　　' Right, boys! ' said the Badger, looking round at his friends. ' The hour has come! Follow me! '
　　And they crashed through the door into the dining-hall.
　　What a battle it was! How the four friends roared as they ran through the hall! What screams of fear came from the surprised weasels and ferrets! Tables and chairs were knocked over, plates and glasses went crashing to the floor. Up and down went the four friends, shouting and roaring, and their sticks whistled through the air. There were only four of them, but they seemed enormous to the weasels and the ferrets. The Wild Wooders ran in terror, escaping through the doors and windows , and even up the chimneys—anywhere to get away from those terrible sticks.
　　In five minutes the room was cleared. The stoats outside, the four friends discovered later, had gone too. They were already frightened by the noise of battle from the hall, so when the weasels and the ferrets started running out in terror, the stoats dropped their guns and ran back to the Wild Wood. In fact, after that night there was no more trouble from the Wild Wooders for a long time. And when any of them met the Badger and his friends out for a walk, they were very polite indeed.
　　Back in Toad Hall, there was a lot of tidying up to do after the battle. At last it was all done, and the four friends, tired but happy, went upstairs to bed.
　　'And now, ' said the Badger, after breakfast the next morning, 'we must have a Victory Party. Toad, you must write and invite all our friends for tonight. '
　　'What—me do all the work
' said Toad crossly, 'Why…'He suddenly stopped, then said, ' Yes, of course. I'll do every-thing. I'll plan the party, and the singing and—'
　　'Oh no, ' said the Rat, 'You're not going to sing any of your songs. '
　　'Not just one little song
' asked Toad miserably.
　　' No, Toady. You know very well that your songs are all about you and how clever you are. They're just one long boast! '
　　' Come on now, Toad, ' said the Badger kindly. 'You know that you have to change your ways and become a sensible animal. Why not begin now
 What better moment could there be, on your return to Toad Hall
'
　　Toad looked at his three friends' serious faces. For a long while he seemed to be thinking deeply. At last he spoke. 'My friends, you are right, ' he said sadly. 'And I am wrong. From today, I will be a very different Toad. You will never be ashamed of me again. '
　　The party was a great success. Everyone wanted to hear about the battle, and there was a lot of noisy talking and laughing. But Toad was not at all noisy. He moved quietly round the room, making sure that everyone had enough to eat and drink. He said very little about the battle, only, 'Oh, it was Badger's clever plan. And the Mole and the Rat did all the hard fighting.
　　His three friends watched him with their mouths open in surprise-which pleased Toad very much. Towards the end of the evening, some of the younger animals started banging on the table and shouting, ' Toad! Song! Mr Toad' s Song! ' But Toad only shook his head gently, and immediately began a quiet conversation with Otter, asking in an interested voice about his children.
　　He was indeed a different Toad!




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Tales of Mystery and Imagination by Edgar Allan Poe





■ The Fall of the House of Usher
　　It was a grey autumn day and the sky was full of large black clouds．All day I had ridden through flat and uninteresting countryside，but at last，as it began to grow dark，I saw the end of my journey．
　　There，in front of me，stood the House of Usher．And at once -I do not know why-a strange feeling of deep gloom came down on me and covered me like a blanket．I looked up at the old house with its high stone walls and narrow windows．I looked around at the thin dry grass and the old dying trees，and an icy hand seemed to take hold of my heart．I felt cold and sick，and could not think of one happy thought to chase away my gloom．
　　Why，I wondered，did the House of Usher make me feel so sad？I could find no answer．
　　There was a lake next to the house and I rode my horse up to the edge and stopped．Perhaps from here the house would not seem so sad，so full of gloom．I looked down into the mirror of dark，still water，and saw again the empty，eye-like windows of the house and the dying trees all around it．The feeling of gloom was stronger than ever．
　　It was in this house that I was going to spend the next few weeks．Its owner，Roderick Usher，had been a good friend of mine when I was a boy．I had not seen him for many years， but recently he had sent me a letter-a sad and terrible letter．He wrote that he was ill，ill in body and ill in mind；that he wanted and needed to see me．I was his only friend，the only person who could help him in his illness．
　　Although we had been good friends when we were young，I knew very little about him．He had never spoken much about himself，but I knew that he came from a very old family of which he was the last living man．I also knew that in the Usher family there had never been many children and so for hundreds of years the family name，together with the family home，had passed straight from father to son．
　　As I stood by the lake，my feeling of gloom grew and grew．I knew also that underneath my gloom lay fear，and fear does strange things to the mind．I began to imagine that the gloom was not in my mind，but was something real．It was like a mysterious cloud，which seemed to come straight from the dark lake and the dying trees and the old walls of the house．A heavy grey cloud，which carried with it disease and fear．
　　This was a dream，I told myself，and I looked more carefully at the building in front of me．It was，indeed，very old and I noticed that every stone had cracks and holes in it．But there was nothing really wrong with the building．No stones were missing．The only thing that I noticed was a very small crack which started at the top of the building and continued all the way down into the dark waters of the lake．
　　I went up to the front of the house．A servant took my horse and I stepped into the large hall．Another servant led me silently upstairs．On the walls there were many strange，dark pictures which made me feel nervous．I remembered these pictures from my earlier visits to the house when I was a child．But the feelings that the pictures gave me on this visit were new to me．
　　On the stairs we met the family doctor．He had a strange look on his face，a look that I did not like ．I hurried on，and finally the servant opened a door and took me into the study．
　　The room was large and long，with high narrow windows，which let in only a little light Shadows lay in all the corners of the room and around the dark pieces of furniture．There were-many books and a few guitars，but there was no life，no happiness in the room．Deep gloom filled the air．
　　When Usher saw me，he got up and welcomed me warmly．I thought he was just being polite，but as I looked into his face，I could see that he was pleased to see me．We sat down，but he did not speak at first，and for a few moments I watched him in surprise and fear．He had changed so much since our last meeting！He had the same pale thin face，the same eyes，large and clear，and the same thin lips and soft hair．But now his skin was too white，his eyes too large and bright，and he seemed a different man．He frightened me．And his long wild hair looked like a ghostly cloud around his head．
　　I noticed that my friend was very nervous and that his feelings changed very quickly．Sometimes he talked a lot，then he suddenly became silent and did not say a word for many hours．At other times he found it difficult to think，and his voice was heavy and slow，like the voice of a man who had drunk too much．
　　He told me why he had wanted to see me，and how he hoped to feel better now that I was with him．He had，he explained，a strange illness which had been in his family for a long time．It was a nervous illness which made him feel everything much more strongly than other people．He could only eat food that was almost tasteless．He had to choose his clothes very carefully because most of them hurt his skin．He could not have flowers in his room because their smell was too strong for him．Light hurt his eyes，and most sounds hurt his ears except the soft sound of guitars．
　　Worst of all，he was a prisoner of his own fear．‘I shall die，’he used to say，‘because of this fear，I'm not afraid of danger．What frightens me is fear itself．At the moment I am fighting against fear，but sooner or later I won't be able to fight any more．’
　　During long conversations with Usher I learnt more about his strange illness．He was sure that it came from the House of Usher itself．He had not left the house for many years and he had become，he thought，as sad as the house itself．The gloom of its grey walls and its dark silent lake had become his own．
　　He also believed that much of his sadness was because his dear sister was seriously ill．He had one sister，Madeleine，the only other person in his family who was still living，but each day she seemed a little nearer to death．
　　‘Her death，’Usher said blackly，‘will leave me alone in the world，the last of all the Ushers．’
　　While he was speaking，Madeleine passed slowly through the back of the long room and，without noticing me，disappeared．As I looked at her，my eyes felt heavy with．sleep，and I had a strange feeling of fear．I looked across at Usher．He had covered his face with his hands，but I could see that he had become even paler，and that he was crying silently．
　　Lady Madeleine's illness was a mysterious one which no doctor could understand．Every day she became weaker and thinner，and sometimes went into a sleep which was more like death than sleep．For years she had fought bravely against her illness，but on the night of my arrival she went to bed and did not get up from it again．‘You will probably not see her again alive，’Usher said to me，shaking his head sadly．
　　During the next few days Usher and I never spoke about his sister．We spent a lot of time painting and reading together，and sometimes he played on his guitar．I tried very hard to help my friend，but I realized that his sadness was too deep．It was a black gloom that covered everything that belonged to his world；sometimes，indeed，he seemed close to the edge of madness．
　　He painted strange pictures，and sang mysterious songs with wild words．His ideas，too，were strange，and he had one idea thst seemed more important to him than all the others．He was quite sure that all things，plants，trees，even stones，were able to feel．
　　‘The House of Usher itself，’he told me，‘is like a living thing．When the walls were first built，life went into the stones themselves and year after year it has grown stronger．Even the air around the walls and above the lake has its own life，and belongs to the house．Don't you see，’he cried，‘how the stones and the air have shaped the lives of the Usher family？’
　　These ideas were too fantastic for me，and I could not answer him．
　　One evening I was reading quietly when my friend told me，in very few words，that the Lady Madeleine had died．He had decided，he said，to keep her body for a fortnight in one of the vaults under the house，before it went to its last resting-place．This was because his sister's illness had been a mysterious one，and her doctors wanted to learn more about it．He asked me to help him and I agreed．
　　Together we carried the body in its coffin down to the vaults under the house．The vault that he had chosen was a long way down，but was under the part of the house where I slept．It had once been a prison，and was small，dark，and airless，with a heavy metal door．
　　We put the coffin down and then gently lifted up the cover to look at the dead woman for the last time．As I looked down at her face，I realized how much Usher's sister looked like him．My friend then said a few quiet words and I learnt that he and his sister had been born on the same day．Each had known the other's mind without the need for words．
　　We could not look at her for long．Her strange illness had left her with a soft pink colour on her face，and that unchanging half－smile on her lips which is so terrible in death．We put back the cover of the coffin，fixed it down well，and after locking the heavy door of the vault，went back upstairs into the gloomy house．
　　After some days of deep unhappiness，I saw that my friend's illness of the mind was growing worse．He did not paint or read any more．He moved slowly from room to room，never knowing what to do．His face became paler，the light disappeared from his eyes，and his voice often shook with fear when he spoke．Sometimes I thought he was trying to tell me some terrible secret．At other times I thought he was going mad．He used to sit for hours，looking at nothing，listening to nothing-except the sounds in his own mind．I myself began to know real fear．I felt my friend's terror，his deep gloom，slowly taking hold of my own mind．
　　About seven or eight days after we had put Lady Madeleine's coffin in the vault，I went to bed but could not sleep．Hour after hour I lay there，fighting the fear and gloom that filled my mind．Outside，there was a storm which was growing wilder，and my room was full of shadows and the dark shapes of the gloomy furniture．I tried to calm myself，but I only became more frightened．
　　Suddenly，my body shook with a new terror．I sat up in bed and listened hard．Yes，I could hear some low sounds，coming not from the storm outside，but from somewhere inside the house．Quickly，I put on my clothes and started walking up and down the room，trying to shake off my terrible fear．
　　Then I heard a knock on my door and Usher came in．His face was as white as it had always been，and there was a kind of madness in his eyes．The look on his face frightened me terribly，but at the same time I was pleased not to be alone any more．
　　For some moments he looked around without saying a word．Then，suddenly，‘Have you not seen it？ No？Then wait．You must see it．’He hurried to the window and opened it．
　　The wind from the violent storm outside crashed into the room，nearly knocking us to the floor．It was，indeed，a wild，but strangely beautiful night．The wind seemed to be going in circles around the house，and huge，heavy black clouds chased each other，first this way，then that way．We could see no moon and no stars，but a pale ghostly light lay around the house．
　　‘You mustn't，no，you must not watch this，’I cried to Usher．I pushed him gently away from the window and to a seat．‘It's only a storm，and the cold night air will be dangerous to your health．Let's close the window and read together．Look，here's one of your favourite books．I will read to you，and you can listen，and so we will pass this terrible night together．’
　　The book which I had picked up was The Sad，Mad Life of Sir Launcelot Canning．It was not really one of US her's favourite books，but it was the only one that I had near me，so I started to read it．It was a wild，fantastic story，but I hoped that my reading would make Usher calmer and less afraid．He listened to me，indeed，but with a kind of mad seriousness that I found frightening．
　　I read for a while and reached the place in the book where Ethelred broke down the door of the old man's house．
　　Now Ethelred decided he could wait outside in the storm no longer．He lifted his heavy stick and beat against the wood-en door until he had made a hole．Then with his hands he pulled the door to pieces．The noise of the dry wood cracking and breaking could be heard all through the forest．
　　As I finished reading this sentence，I jumped in my seat and then sat very still．I thought that I had heard，from somewhere far away in the house，the same noise of cracking and breaking wood．But I could not hear it clearly，and the noise of the storm was much louder．I continued reading：
　　Ethelred entered the house but could not see the old man．Then the house disappeared and he saw a dragon，with fire coming out of its mouth．Ethelred lifted his heavy stick and brought it crashing down on the dragon's head．As the dragon fell dying to the ground，it gave a terrible cry-a long，hard，unnatural scream．
　　Here again I stopped suddenly．I was sure that I could hear a cry．It was low and far away，but it was a long screaming sound-just like the one described in the book．
　　Although I was feeling so nervous，I tried hard to hide my terror．I was not sure if Usher had heard the sounds that I had heard．In the last few minutes he had moved and was now sitting with his face towards the door．But I could see that his lips were shaking and his body was moving gently from side to side．I continued reading the story：
　　And now Ethelred，after he had killed the dragon，turned and saw in front of him a palace of gold with tall gates of shining silver in the walls．Bravely，Ethelred ran towards the palace，but the shining silver gates did not wait for his coming and fell to the ground at his feet with a great and terrible ringing sound．
　　As I read these words，I heard clearly the loud，heavy sound of metal falling．I jumped to my feet，but Usher sat in his seat and did not move．I ran towards him．He was looking straight in front of him and his face was like stone．As I placed my hand on his arm，his body began to shake．A sickly smile came over his lips，and he spoke in a low hurried voice．He did not seem to realize that I was there．I put my head close to his to catch his words．
　　‘Don't I hear it？-yes，I hear it，and I have heard it．For many minutes，many hours，many days I have heard it-but I was too frightened，too frightened to speak．We have put her alive into her coffin！Did I not tell you that I could hear even the softest sound？I tell you now that I heard her move in the coffin．I heard the sounds many days ago，but my terror was too great-I could not speak！And now tonight-when you read about Ethelred breaking the old man's door，about the cry of the dragon，and the falling of the gates-it was，in fact，the breaking of her coffin，the scream of metal as she broke open the vault，and the ringing crash as the metal door fell to the floor！Oh，where can I escape to？Is she hurrying towards me at this very minute？Is that her angry footstep that I can hear on the stairs？Can I hear the heavy and terrible beating of her heart？MADMAN！’
　　He jumped up and shouted，screaming out his words like a man dying in terror．‘MADMAN！I TELL YOU THAT AT THIS MINUTE SHE Is STANDING OUTSIDE THIS DOOR！’
　　AS he screamed these words，the heavy door was thrown open by the strong wind．There，outside the door，dressed in the white clothes of the dead，stood the tall figure of the Lady Madeleine of Usher．There was blood on her hands，her arms，her torn white clothes．Every part of her body showed the marks of her long fight to escape from the coffin．For a moment she stood there shaking，moving slowly from side to side．Then with a low cry she fell heavily onto her brother．And in the moment of her now final death，he fell with her to the floor-a dead man，killed by his own terror．
　　From that room，and from that house，I ran in horror．Out－side，the storm was still violent and as I ran past the lake，a sudden wild light shone around me．I turned to see where this strange light was coming from．It was the moon，a full，blood-red moon，shining through a narrow crack in the walls of the house．It was the crack which started at the roof of the building and went right down to the ground．As I watched，the crack grew larger，the wind grew wilder-now I could see the full circle of the blood－red moon，and the great walls of the house breaking and falling．There was a long shouting sound，like the voice of a thousand waters，and the deep dark lake closed over the broken pieces of the House of Usher．






■ The Black Cat
　　I know you will not believe this story．Only a madman could hope that you would believe it-and I am not mad．But as I am going to die tomorrow，I would like to tell my story to the world today．Perhaps some day，somebody more calm and less excitale than me，will be able to explain it．
　　I have always loved animals．I loved them deeply，from the very first days of my life．When I was young，we always had many animals in our house，and so I used to spend most of my days playing with them and taking care of them．As the years passed，I grew into a quiet，gentle man，and my love for animals grew too．I found that they were more friendly，more honest than most men Animals were always my best friends．
　　I got married when I was quite young．Luckily，my wife loved animals too，and she used to buy me many animals as presents．In fact，our house was always full of animals-we had birds，fish，a dog，chickens，and a cat．
　　This cat，whom we called Pluto，was a large black cat．He was a beautiful animal，and he was also very clever．I loved Pluto more than I loved all my other animals．I wanted to do everything for him myself，so I never let my wife take care of him．I used to play with him and give him his food，and he followed me everywhere I went．
　　For several years Pluto and I were the best of friends，but during this time my life slowly changed．I became a heavy drinker，and my need for alcohol soon grew into a terrible disease．I was often angry and violent．I began to shout at my wife，and I even started to hit her．My animals，too，felt the change in me．I stopped taking care of them and sometimes I was even cruel to them．But I was never cruel to Pluto．As time passed，my disease grew worse，and soon even Pluto was not safe from my violence．
　　One night I arrived home late．I was very，very drunk．When Pluto saw me，he tried to run away from me，and this made me angry．I caught him by his neck and shook him．He，in his fright，bit me on the hand．At once，a wild，terrible anger filled me，and I could feel nothing except burning hate．Slowly I took a knife from my pocket，opened it，and then carefully cut out one of Pluto's eyes from its socket．I shake today as I write these words down．Every time I remember that day，I still feel sadness and pain．
　　When I woke up the next morning，I felt ashamed of what I had done．But this feeling was not strong enough to make me change my life．I continued to drink because it was too difficult for me to stop．Soon，I had forgotten what I had done．
　　As the months passed，Pluto got better．His empty eye socket still looked terrible，but at least he wasn't in pain any more．Not surprisingly，he used to run away from me when he saw me，frightened that I would hurt him again．At first I was sad to see him run away-an animal which had once so loved me．Then I began to feel a little angry．There is something strange about the human heart．We humans seem to like hurt－ing ourselves．Haven't we all，a hundred times，done something stupid or evil just because we know that we should not do it？It was because of this，this need to hurt myself，that I did this next evil thing…
　　One morning I woke，found a rope and calmly tied it round Pluto's neck．Then I hung the poor animal from a tree and left it there to die．I cried as I did this terrible thing．My face was wet with tears and my heart was black and heavy．But I killed it．I killed it because I knew it had loved me，because it hadn't hurt me，even because I knew that I was doing something terrible and wrong．
　　That same night we had a fire in our house．I was woken from my sleep by loud shouts of ‘Fire！’When I opened my eyes，I found that the fire had already reached the bedroom．My wife and I ran out of the house as fast as we could．Luckily we escaped death，but the house and almost everything in it was destroyed．
　　The next day I went back into the house and saw several people standing in a group，looking at a wall．It was the only wall of the house that was still standing after the fire．It was one of my bedroom walls，the one where the head of my bed had rested．As I came nearer to the wall I heard someone say，‘How strange！’and another person，‘That's impossible！’And then I saw it-a huge cat．Not a real cat，but the shape of a cat outlined in the white bedroom wall．It was as clear as a picture．I could even see a rope around the animal's neck．
　　I stood there in horror，too frightened to move．Then，slowly，I thought back to the night before．I had left the cat hanging from a tree，in the garden at the back of my house．When a neighbour had first noticed the fire，many people had run into the garden．One of them had probably cut the cat from the tree and thrown it through my open window，in order to wake me up．The cat's body had hit my bedroom wall and left its shape there，because the plaster on that wall was new and still soft．
　　Although I thought that this was a very reasonable explanation，the strange shape on the wall still worried me．I thought about the cat day and night．I began to feel sorry that I had killed it．I started walking around the streets at night looking at all the cats，to see if I could find another one like Pluto．
　　One night，I was drinking in my favourite bar when I suddenly noticed a large，black cat．I went up to it and touched it．It was very large-as large as Pluto had been．It also looked very like Pluto．Except for one thing．Pluto had been black all over，but this cat had a white mark on its front．
　　I touched the cat and he immediately lay down against my leg and seemed very friendly towards me．This，I decided，was the cat that I wanted．I offered the barman some money to buy the cat from him，but he said that the cat didn't belong to him．In fact，he had no idea where it had come from．
　　So I took the cat home．My wife liked it immediately，and it stayed with us from that day．But soon-I do not know why-the cat started to make me angry，and，as time passed，I began to hate it．I did not hurt it in any way，but I always tried to keep as far away from it as possible．
　　I knew one reason why I hated this cat so much．Oh the morning after I had brought it home，I saw that，like Pluto，it had lost one of its eyes．My wife，who was the kind，gentle per－son that I had once been，only loved the cat more because of this．But the cat didn't like my wife．It loved me alone．
　　Every time I sat down，it used to jump onto my knees．When I went out of a room，it used to run out in front of me and get between my feet，or climb up my legs．At these times，I wanted to kill it．But I didn't，because I was too afraid-afraid of the cat，and even more afraid of the white mark on its chest．
　　I have already mentioned this mark．At first，there was nothing strange about it．It was just a white mark．But slowly this mark grew and changed until it had the clear shape of a terrible，a horrible thing-I find it difficult，here in my prison，to write the word．It was the shape of the GALLOWS！Yes，those horrible wooden posts from which they hang men by a rope around the neck！
　　As each day passed，my fear grew and grew．I，a man，a strong man，had become afraid of a cat！Why was I so fright－ened，so worried by a stupid animal？Day and night，I could get no rest．I had the most terrible dreams，and my mind turned to dark，evil thoughts．I hated everything，everybody-and life itself．
　　One day my wife and I needed to get something from the cellar underneath the house．The cat followed us down the steps and threw itself in front of me．I almost fell on my face and，mad with anger，I took hold of an axe and tried to kill the animal．But my wife caught my arm to stop me，and then anger exploded in my mind．I turned and drove the axe deep into her head．She fell dead on the floor，without a sound．
　　After this horrible murder，I calmly made plans to hide the body．I knew I couldn't take it out of the house，either by day or night，because the neighbours would see me．So I had to think of other ways… I could cut the body up into very small pieces and then burn them in a fire．I could hide the body under the floor．Or I could put the body in a box and then ask someone to carry the box away… Finally，I thought of a better idea．I decided to hide the body behind the walls of the cellar．
　　I knew immediately which wall to choose．There was a wall in the cellar round the bottom of an old chimney，which was no longer used．This wall had bricks in the front and back but was empty in the middle．I started work at once． I took out some of the bricks from the front wall and carefully put the body against the back wall．Then I put back the bricks and covered them with plaster．I made sure that the plaster did not look new，and soon the wall looked just the same as all the other walls．When I had finished my work，I looked at the plaster．‘I've never done a better piece of work！’I said to myself happily．
　　I then looked around for the cat，to kill it．It had brought too much unhappiness into my life，and so it，too，must now die．I looked for it everywhere，but it had disappeared．I was free at last！That night I had a deep，peaceful sleep-I，who had just killed my wife，slept well！
　　Three days passed and still the cat did not appear．I was now a happy man，happier than I had been for a long time．I wasn't worried by what I had done．People had asked a few questions and the police had visited my house，but they had found nothing．
　　On the fourth day the police visited again and began to search the house．They looked into all the rooms and then went down into the cellar．I went with them，feeling calm and safe．I watched them as they looked everywhere．They seemed quite happy that there was nothing there and they got ready to leave．I was very happy．I was sure that I was safe，but I wanted to say something，just a word or two，to show how unworried I was．
　　‘Gentlemen，’I said，‘I'm pleased that you've found nothing here，and that you are now leaving this house…But let me show you something，gentlemen．Do you see how well built this house is？These walls，you will notice，are very strong．’As I said these words，I knocked on the wall with a stick-the wall where i had hidden my wife！
　　At that moment we heard a sound．It was a strange sound，unlike anything I had ever heard before．The sound was soft at first，almost like a baby crying．Then it grew louder and louder and turned into one long，endless scream．It was like a cry rising from Hell．
　　The policemen looked at me，then at one another．They ran to the wall and started pulling out the bricks as fast as they could．In minutes the wall was down and there，for all to see，was the body of my dead wife．On top of her head，with a red，open mouth and one burning eye，sat the black cat-the animal which had made me a murderer，and which would now send me to my death．
　　I had put the horrible thing into the wall，alive，with my wife！






■ The Masque of the Red Death
　　The Red Death had been in the country for many，many years．No disease had ever been so deadly．People called it the Red Death because it left blood，red horrible blood，on the body and face of each person it visited．And no one，if visited，was ever left alive．Once a person was touched by the Red Death，he immediately felt pains，and soon afterwards started to bleed from every part of his body．in thirty minutes he was dead．After that no one，not even his family，went near the blood-covered body．
　　Everybody was afraid of the Red Death-everybody except the fearless Prince Prospero．He refused to be troubled by it．Although half the people of his country had already died from this terrible disease，he continued to enjoy life to the full．One day he decided to invite a thousand of his strong and brave friends to stay with him in one of his castles，far out in the countryside．There the Red Death would not be able to touch them．
　　It was a huge and extraordinary castle，built to Prince Prospero's own plan．It had strong high walls and great gates of heavy metal．Now when the Prince and his friends arrived at the castle gates they went inside，locked the gates carefully and threw away the keys．In that way no one would be able to enter or escape．They were all there together，far away from the Red Death．Now they could forget the world outside and think only of themselves．They had everything they needed to amuse themselves，because the Prince had forgotten nothing．He had brought in food and wine，actors，musicians，and dancers．All of this，and life itself，was inside the castle．Outside lay the Red Death．
　　Towards the end of the fifth or sixth month，while the Red Death was at its most deadly outside，the Prince gave a wonderful masked ball for his friends．It was a wild and wonderful ball，but first let me tell you about the rooms in which he gave the ball．There were seven rooms in all．In most castles，of course，the rooms for great parties or dances join each other end to end．In this way，when the doors at the end of each room are opened，the seven rooms become one huge room，and you can see from the first room right through to the last one．In Prospero's castle，it was different．Each room turned suddenly round a corner into the next，so if you were standing in one room it was impossible to see into the other rooms．
　　In the middle of each wall，on the right and left，there was a tall，narrow window opening onto the closed passage which ran along beside all seven rooms．Each window was made of different coloured glass，and the colour of the glass was the same as the colour of the room that it opened onto．The first room，for example，was blue，and so its windows were also a deep blue．The second room was purple，and so the windows，too，were purple．The third was green，with green windows，the fourth orange，the fifth white，and the sixth violet．The seventh room was black．Its walls were black，its thick，heavy carpet was also black．But its windows were red-a deep blood－red．
　　There were no candles in any of the rooms．The only light came from fires，in hanging metal baskets，which were in the passages outside the rooms．Each fire was opposite a window，and so the light from the fire shone through the coloured glass and filled each room with strange and fantastic shadows．But in the black room the firelight that shone through the blood-red window changed the room into something too horrible to describe．In that strange light，faces became wild and frightening，and few people were brave enough to enter the room at all．
　　In this room，against the farthest wall，stood a huge black clock Every hour it chimed loud and deep and clear，filling the castle with its long，gloomy sound．And while the clock chimed，the musicians stopped playing and even the wildest dancers stood still，in silence and fear，listening to the passing of another hour hour…But when the chiming stopped，people looked at each other and laughed，trying hard to pretend that they had not been frightened．Happiness came into the castle again，until the clock chimed the passing of the next hour，and the same fear returned．
　　Prince Prospero's ball，although given in these strange rooms，was wild and happy．The Prince had planned every-thing-the colours，the paintings on the walls，even the cloaks and masks worn by each one of his friends．He had chosen all the clothes with the greatest of care，putting together the beautiful and the ugly，the strange and the fantastic，the surprising and the frightening．
　　Each man and woman was dressed like a terrible dream．And in and out of the rooms these dreams walked and danced，their clothes changing colour each time they entered a different room．But no one was brave enough now to enter the black room．As the night passed and the fires burned brighter，the colours and shapes in this room became more horrible than ever．The black carpet and walls seemed full of gloom，and the deep chimes of the black clock sounded even more frightening．
　　But the other six rooms were full of life and pleasure．People were dancing and singing，talking and laughing，and the wild noise of a thousand happy men and women rang through the castle．Then came the hour of midnight，and once again dancers and musicians became still and silent，as the clock slowly rang the twelve long chimes of midnight．And because the twelve chimes took a long time to ring，each person had more time to think，and feel uncomfortable．They also had time，before the last chime had sounded，to notice a masked figure who had not been there before．The first person who saw the stranger told the next person，who told another，and in a few minutes a cry of fear and horror rose up from the crowd．
　　Now you will remember that everyone at the ball was wearing strange cloaks and masks，which belonged more to the world of dreams and wild imagination than to everyday life．So why，you may ask，this horror，and this fear？But even in the cruellest heart there are some fears too terrible to laugh at The tall thin figure of the stranger was dressed from head to foot in the white clothes of the dead．And the mask over the face was frighteningly real-it was the face of a dead man．Worse still，the face and the body were covered with red，horrible blood！Here，in the middle of all that dancing and happiness was a living picture of the Red Death！
　　When Prince Prospero saw the masked stranger，his face became white with fear．Then his fear turned to anger and he shouted out，‘Who is that？Who is mad enough to play games with us，and with death，in this way？Take hold of him，and pull off his mask．I want to see the face of the man who，tomorrow，will hang from the castle roof．’
　　The Prince was in the blue room as he said these words．They rang loudly and clearly through the seven rooms．Many of the Prince's friends started to run towards the masked figure，but they were all too frightened to touch him．With slow and silent steps，the stranger walked slowly towards the Prince，passing very near to him．Then he continued walking，and went from the blue room into the purple one，from the purple into the green，and then into the orange room，the white room and then the violet room．No one tried to stop him．
　　Then Prince Prospero，mad with anger，hurried through the six rooms，with a sword in his hand．As the masked figure entered the black room，the Prince was close behind him，hold-ing his sword up high．At that moment the stranger turned suddenly to look at the Prince． There was a loud cry-and the sword fell upon the black carpet，followed by the dead body of the fearless Prince Prospero． At once a crowd of people ran into the black room and took hold of the masked stranger．He was standing very still，in the shadow of the black clock．Angrily， they pulled away the clothes and the mask，but then they backed away in horror，because inside the clothes and mask they found-nothing．
　　And now each person in the castle understood that the Red Death was there， among them． It had come like a thief in the night．And one by one they fell down dead．And the black clock stopped ringing with the death of the last person．And the fires also died away．And the only things left in the castle were Darkness and the Red Death．






■ William Wilson
　　william Wilson is not my name．But I shall use it in this story because my real name is too well known， too hated in every corner of the world． My evil crimes have made sure of that．And as the day of my death comes nearer，I feel the need to write， to explain to you how my life of crime began.
　　Most men become evil slowly．They start with little crimes and then move on to bigger ones．But I am different．I moved into real crime with just one big step．Has any man lived a life as evil as mine？ But now， the shadow of death fills me with fear；day and night I have the most terrible dreams．Perhaps someone， somewhere， will feel sorry for me．Listen to my story… I was a wild and excitable child．My parents worried about me and often tried to punish me， but they never succeeded in changing me．I refused to obey them and I never followed any orders that they gave me．I wanted to be free so I listened only to myself．The first school that I can remember was a large and very old house in a small， quiet English village．As I write，I can sill feel the coolness of the shadowy gardens near the house． I can smell the sweetness of the flowers and hear the deep sound of the church bells as they rang every hour. These feelings give me some moments of happiness as I sit here in black misery， waiting for death．In fact，it is here，in this school，that my story really begins… The school building was large and dd．The big gardens were closed in by a high wall，with broken glass at the top，just like a prison．We only went out three times a week．On Saturday afternoons we took a walk in some fields near the school，under the watchful eye of one of our teachers．On Sundays we went out twice，morning and evening，to go to the village church．
　　I was not bored or unhappy during my life at school．Children can amuse themselves very easily，and in my imagination，I lived an exciting life，full of mystery and interest．But in the real world，the days were always the same-we woke up and went to bed，we walked in the fields and played in the play-ground…The playground was，indeed，a very special place．It was a place where friends were made and lost，a place always full of trouble and excitement．
　　I was the kind of boy who liked to give orders，not to take them．I always wanted to win every game，every fight，and to be first in everything．All the other boys，even those a bit older than myself，were happy to follow and obey me．All，that is，except one．His name was the same as mine，so I shall call him William William，too．We were not from the same family，but we both had the same name．This was not surprising because my name was not an unusual one．
　　This William Wilson refused to obey me．He argued with me， both in class and in the playground，and tried to stop the other boys from following me．Actually，I think I was the only boy who realized what he was doing．He did everything very cleverly and silently， and in this way nobody really noticed it．But I-I noticed what he did，and I was frightened by it．I was afraid that Wilson was stronger than I was．I became worried and angry when I saw the other boys follow him instead of me．But Wilson was always cool and calm．Nothing ever troubled him．He seemed to want one thing only-to see me fright-ened and unhappy．But at the same time I sometimes noticed that he showed a friendliness towards me-which was most unwelcome to me．It is difficult for me to describe my feelings towards Wilson．I didn't hate him，but neither did I like him．I think that，more than anything，I felt afraid of him．At the same time I wanted to know more about him．I wanted to find something that frightened or worried him．But I could find nothing．There was nothing strange in the way he looked or walked．Nothing，that is，except for one thing-his voice．His voice was strange．When he spoke，he could never speak loudly．In fact， he never spoke above a whisper．
　　Wilson was quick to find the one thing that I really did not like．It was my name．Although I come from an old and famous family，my name is a very everyday one．It could belong to any unimportant workman．I had always hated my name， but now I hated it even more because both of us had the same name．I heard it twice as often．And there was something that worried me even more deeply．We seemed to look alike as well．We were as tall as one another，we were both thin，and even our faces were alike．Because our names were the same，I knew that the older boys thought that we were brothers， but nobody seemed to notice that we looked alike．But Wilson noticed it and he also saw that I was angry about it．Nothing ever escaped him．He always knew my deepest feelings．After a while he started to dress like me，and even to walk like me．Luckily，he could not speak like me when I spoke loudly，but when I spoke in a whisper，his whisper was just like mine．All these things troubled me deeply．I could see that Wilson enjoyed making me angry，and he used to laugh at me secretly．Strangely， the other boys never noticed how he made fun of me，and copied me in every way．I was the only one who noticed it.
　　Very often he used to give me advice，telling me quietly what I should do or what I should say．I hated him even more when he did this．Today，of course， I realize that his advice was always very good and sensible．What a pity that I never followed it！
　　As time went by，I became more and more angry with him．Why should he，or anyone， give me advice？My feelings towards him changed and I actually began to hate him．He noticed this and tried not to come near me so much．
　　One day，towards the end of my fifth year at school we had a violent argument．While we were arguing， he showed his feelings more openly than usual，and a very strange idea came into my mind．I thought-how can I describe it？-I thought just for a second or two that I had known him before，a long，long time ago，when we were very young children．It was，as I say，a strange and very stupid idea，and I forgot it as quickly as I could.
　　But that night，when every one was asleep，I got out of bed．Then I walked through the dark building，with a small lantern in my hands，until I reached Wilson's room．I left the lantern outside and went near to his bed．Yes，he was a sleep．I returned to get my lantern and went back to his bed．I had planned to do something cruel to him while he slept．But as I looked at the sleeping boy，my heart beat faster and I was filled with fear．Was this really what William Wilson looked like？ Did he look just the same when he was awake？I knew that he was as tall as I was．I knew，too，that he walked like me and talked like me，and copied me in every way that he could．But was it possible that the person in that bed looked so like me in every way？I began to shake with fear，and my body turned ice-cold．Surely he couldn't look like this！Was I really looking at a boy who was not just a copy of me，but…
　　I was more frightened than I had ever been in my life．I went silently out of his room，left the school building and never returned there again． After several lazy months at home，I was sent to Eton，one of the most famous English bys' schools．There，I soon forgot William Wilson and the strange fears I had felt．If I thought about them at all， I used to laugh at myself． My life at Eton lasted for three wild and evil years．I learnt to be clever and secret，and was interested only in new ways of amusing myself．I chose the worst kind of students for my friends，and spent all my time in evil enjoyment．One night，when I was in my third year，I invited some students to a party in my rooms．We drank and played cards all through the night．As well as the wine， we had other， perhaps more dangerous，Pleasures．As the first morning light started to appear，I suggested a new evil amusement． Then I noticed that somebody was opening my door and I heard a servant's voice， ‘There's somebody outside who wants to speak to you，sir．He seems to be in a hurry．’
　　I walked， with difficulty， to the hall， as I was feeling very drunk with the wine．It was still too dark to see clearly，but I could just see the shape of a young man．He was as tall as I was， and was wearing the same clothes as myself． I could not see his face．
　　He came up to me and whispered the words‘William Wilson！’ in my ear．I knew the voice at once．It was impossible to mistake it．Those two words were enough to fill me with fear．Before I could look into his face， he had disappeared． The meeting only lasted a few seconds， but for some weeks I could not forget it．I thought of it all the time．Who and what was this william Wilson？ Where did he come from？ What did he want from me？My questions stayed unanswered， but I did discover one thing．I learnt that William Wilson had left my last school on the same day that I myself had run away from it． Soon I forgot about him again，and not long afterwards I went up to Oxford University．My parents were not sensible people and they always gave me a lot of money．I was able to live a fashionable， expensive life， and to choose as my friends the sons of the richest families of England．There was nothing at all to stop me now．I spent my money wildly， and passed my days and nights in dangerous and exciting pleasures． At Oxford I spent a lot of my time gambling．I became，in fact，a most clever and successful gambler-no better than a thief．I played cards in order to win money from the other students and become even richer．Of course， I was careful to play only with students who were bad at playing cards．In this way I could be sure of winning every time．My friends were not clever enough to see what I was doing．
　　In my second year at University I met a new student called Glendinning．He came from an old English family and was one of the richest students in the university．I soon realized that he was very unintelligent and because of this he was，of course，a very suitable person for me to gamble with！I started to play cards with him often，and for some time I made sure that he always won.
　　At last I decided that the time was right and I made my plans carefully．I met Glendinning at the rooms of a friend of mine，a Mr．Preston（who had no idea of my secret plan）．Eight or ten other friends were also invited．In this way Glendinning had no idea that I planned to gamble with him that evening．In fact，at the party，it was he who first suggested playing cards.
　　We played for many long hours．In the end，by my careful plan，I was playing alone against Glendinning，while the others watched our game．Glendinning had drunk a lot of wine during the evening and his hands were beginning to shake a little-from fear or from the wine，I wasn't sure．He had already lost a large amount of money．Then he did what I had hoped for．He took another long drink of wine and said， ‘Let's double the stakes.’Beginners always think they can win back what they have lost in this way.
　　At first I pretended to refuse．Then he became angry，so，naturally，I had to agree．My plan was working excellently．We continued playing，and in less than an hour my winnings were four times as big．Glendinning's face was now as white as a sheet．Everyone around the table started talking， and to my surprise I heard the words，‘That's the end of Glendinning．He's just lost everything he had！’
　　I had heard that Glendinning was very rich indeed-rich enough to lose a lot of money and not to worry about it．Now，I understood from the whispers around the table，that this was not true．I had，in fact，won everything he owned，and so destroyed him．Nobody spoke．Glendinning had covered his face with his hands and everyone clearly felt very sorry for him．Even I began to feel a little worried，and wondered what I should do.
　　As we stood in silence，the doors suddenly opened and a strong wind filled the room．It blew out all the candles in the room and we were left in darkness．But in the few seconds before the candles went out，we noticed that a man had entered the room．He was about as tall as I was，and his face and body were hidden by a long cloak．As we stood in the darkness，we could feel him standing in the room．
　　Then he began to speak．He spoke in a whisper，and his voice filled me with fear．‘Gentlemen，’he said.‘I am here because I have something important to tell you．I am afraid that you do not really know the man who has just won so much money from Glendinning．Let me tell you how to learn more about him．Please look very carefully inside his left sleeve and at the several little packets inside the large pockets of his jacket．’Immediately after these words he left the room，as silently as he had entered it.
　　That moment was one of the worst moments of my life．I had no time to do anything．My friends fell on me angrily，lit the candles again，and searched my clothes．They found the single cards hidden carefully inside my left sleeve，and in my pockets they discovered the packets of special cards which helped me to win every game I played．
　　My friends stood around me in a circle and looked at me in silence．Mr．Preston then picked up a cloak from the floor．‘Mr．Wilson，’he said．‘Here is your cloak． You will，I hope，leave my room，and then leave Oxford immediately．’
　　I wanted to hit him，but something stopped me．It was the cloak that Preston was holding in his hands．Although it looked like my cloak，I knew that it wasn't，because my own cloak was already over my left arm．It was a very unusual and expensive cloak，which a shop had made specially for me．How was it possible that there was now another cloak just like it？
　　I thought back to the moment when the stranger had come into the room．Yes，he had been wearing a cloak too… Full of fear，I quickly took the cloak from Mr．Preston and left the room．The next morning I left Oxford and escaped to Europe．I was now known to be a cheat at cards and every door in England would be closed against me．
　　But bad luck travelled with me．In fact I soon realized that my troubles at Oxford had been only the beginning… Soon after I arrived in Paris，I met William Wilson again．There，too，he destroyed my evil hopes．Everywhere I went， year after year，he appeared like a ghost and came between me and my plans．In Rome he stopped me from getting what I wanted．In Vienna，too-in Berlin，and even in Moscow！Wasn't there anywhere where I could be left alone？I went from city to city，trying to escape from him．But I couldn't feel free．I couldn't be alone．He followed me everywhere． Again and again I used to ask myself these questions．‘Who is he？Where does he come from？What does he want from me？’But I could find no answer．I thought deeply about all the times when I had seen him．In every city，I realized，Wilson had done the same thing．He had not stopped my plans all the time，but only when they were evil and dangerous，either to others or to myself．I understood all this，but still I was very angry．Why couldn't Wilson leave me alone？ Why couldn't he let me live in the way I wanted to？
　　I realized another thing too．Every time Wilson appeared，he had never let me see his face．I had always noticed his clothes．It was difficult not to notice them because they were always the same as mine．But he kept his face hidden from me．Why did he do this？Did he really think that I was so stupid？Did he think I hadn't realized who he was？The man who followed me everywhere and destroyed my plans again and again was the same William Wilson of my schooldays！But let me continue with my story．
　　Until now I had felt afraid of Wilson and had obeyed him．The mystery of his sudden arrivals， his cleverness， his deep understanding of me-all these things filled me with fear．I always obeyed him，although I hated myself for doing it．But recently I had become a very heavy drinker．Wine made me feel brave and strong，able to fight anybody who tried to stop me．At the same time I began to think that Wilson was becoming weaker．Was this really happening or was it just a dream？ I cannot tell，but I do know that my own feelings were becoming more and more violent．I began to feel a burning hope-soon I would break free from this terrible enemy and never take his orders again．
　　One evening，in 18-，I was in Rome and was invited to a big party in the palace of Duke Di Broglio．The Duke was old and boring，but his wife was young and beautiful，and not very sensible．I had evil plans for her．She and I had agreed to meet，during the party， in a quiet room where we could be alone．
　　As I walked from room to room looking for her in the crowds，I suddenly felt a hand touch my arm．Then I heard a whisper in my ears．Angrily I turned round and saw a man．He was wearing the same clothes as I was，but his face was covered with a black mask．I caught him by his arm．‘Stop！’I shouted．‘I have had enough trouble from you！This is the last time you'll follow me anywhere！Come with me now into the next room．If you don't，I shall kill you right now，here where you stand！’ I took him into a small room nearby and pushed him violently to the floor．He got to his feet shakily， and stood up against the wall．I then closed the door and ordered him to fight．For a second he did not move．Then he silently took out his swood．
　　It was a short fight．I was wild and excited and felt stronger than I had ever felt before．After only a few seconds I pushed him against the wall and plunged my sword into his body again and again．
　　At that moment somebody tried to open the door．I ran to check that the door was locked and then ran back towards my enemy． How can I describe what I saw at that moment？During those few seconds when I had turned to the door，the room had become strangely different．There was now a large mirror at the end of the room．I was sure that it had not been there before．As I stepped up to the mirror，I saw myself，walking forward shakily，my face white and covered with blood．
　　Or so I thought．But I was wrong．It was my enemy，Wilson，who stood before me in his last moments of life．His mask and cloak lay on the floor．His face was now uncovered．And I saw，in terror，that his face was my own！
　　Then Wilson spoke，but no longer in a whisper，and I thought I heard my own voice speaking as he said： ‘You have won，and I have lost．But from this moment you，too，are dead-dead to the world，to Heaven，and to hope！You lived in me-and，in my death，look in my face，which is your own，and see how you have murdered yourself．’






■ The Tell-Tale Heart
　　It is true that I had been-and I am -very nervous，but do you really think that I am mad 
 I could see and hear more clearly7-not less ,because of the disease． My hearing，more than anything，was excellent． I could hear all things，things in this world and things in heaven． I heard many things，things in this world and things in heaven ． I heard many things in hell，too． So how can I be mad 
 See how clearly and calmly I can tell my story．
　　I cannot explain how the idea first came into my head． But once I had thought of the idea，I could not forget it． I had no reason to do it ． I was not angry． I loved the old man ．H e had never hurt me in any way ． I didn't want his gold． I think it was his eye! Yes! He had a pale，blue eye，the eye of a vulture． Whenever I looked at it ,my blo0od became cold; and so ,very slowly，I decided to kill the old man and escape from the eye for ever．
　　You are thinking ,I know，that I am mad ． But madmen are not clever． And see how cleverly I prepared my plan! Every day that week I was so kind to the old man ! And every night of that week，at about midnight，I opened his door very，very quietly． First I put my dark lantern through the opening of the door． The lantern was closed，and so no light came out of it ,none at all ． Then slowly，very slowly，I put my head inside the opening． I took sixty long minutes just to put my head inside． Would a madman have worked so carefully
 And when my head was inside the room，I opened the lantern carefully and a thin ray of light fell onto the vulture eye． But the eye was always closed，so I could not do the work．You see，I did not hate the man; it was only the eye that I hated．
　　On the eighth night I started opening the door even more carefully．I was feeling calm and strong．There I was，opening his door，and he did not even know that I was there! I almost laughed at the idea． And perhaps，at that moment，he heard me，because he suddenly moved in his bed But I did not move away． I knew that he could not see the opening of the door，so I continued pushing it open，slowly and quietly．
　　When my head was in the room，I tried to open the lantern but my thumb slipped and I made a noise．Immediately，the man sat up in bed and shouted，‘Who's there
’
　　I said nothing．For an hour I just stood there，without moving，and he sat in his bed，listening．Then he made a soft noise，a noise which I recognized． It was the noise of terror，the terror of death．I knew the sound because I had made it myself，many times，in the deep of the night，when all the world was asleep I felt sorry for the old man，but I laughed silently．I knew that he had been awake since the first noise，and his fear had grown and grown．Death had entered his room，and now the shadow of deatn lay all around him． He could neither see me nor hear me，but he could feel my head inside his room．
　　I opened the lantern a little and a thin ray of light feel on his eye．It was open，and as I looked at it，I became angry．I could see it clearly，a horrible，pale blue eye that turned my blood cold． I could see nothing of the man's face or body，just his eye．
　　And then I heard a sound．Hadn't I told you that my hearing was excellent
 I knew the sound．It was the beating of the old man's heart．It grew louder and quicker．Yes，louder and louder with every minute．The old man's terror must have been very great． And now a new terror came to me-a neighbour might hear the noise of this beating heart! The old man's time had come!
　　I opened the lantern fully and ran into the room．He shouted once-but only once because I pulled him to the floor and pulled the heavy bed over him． For many minutes the heart continued to beat，but then it stopped．The old man was dead．I put my hand on his heart and held it there for many minutes．There was no life in him at all．Now his eye would not trouble me again．
　　Perhaps you are still thinking that I am mad．You will not，when I tell you of way I hid the body．First，I cut it into pieces． I cut off the head and the arms and the legs． I then took up three boards from the wooden floor，and hid the body underneath．Finally，I replaced the wooden boards with great care．Now no human eye-not even his- would see anything wrong．There was nothing to see-not even any blood．A bowl had caught it all-ha! ha!
　　When I finished，it was four o'clock and it was still dark．There was a knock at the front door．Calmly，because I knew I had nothing to fear，I opened the door．Three policemen came in．They had come because a neighbour had reported a loud shout coming from the house．
　　I welcomed the policemen and asked them to come in． I explained that it was I who had shouted，in a dream．The old man，I said，was away in the country．I took them round the house and asked them to search it well．Then I took them to the old man's room and showed them all his things．I brought chairs into the room and invited them to sit down and rest a while Calmly，I put my own chair on the place where I had hidden his body．
　　The policemen seemed happy．They could see from the way I spoke that all was well．They continued talking，but I began to get tired．My head ached，and there was a ringing noise in my ears．I wanted the men to go away，but they continued to talk．The ringing became louder and clearer．And then I realized that the noise was not in my ears．
　　I became very pale，and starting talking more loudly．But the noise became louder too． What could do
 It was a low，soft sound，like the sound made by a watch when it is covered in cotton．I spoke more loudly．The noise became louder too．Why，oh why，didn't the men go away
 I walked up and down the room． I became angry，I argued，I threw the chair onto the floor．But the noise continued to grow louder，louder than every noise I made．And the men went on talking and smiling．Was it possible that they hadn't heard the terrible noise
 No! no! They heard! They knew! They were only pretending that they hadn't heard the noise! I was sure of this-I still am and I hated their smiling faces．I felt that I must scream or die! And now，again，the noise was louder，louder，louder!
　　'Stop! 'I shouted．'Stop pretending that you cannot hear it! Yes，I did it! Pull up the floorboards here! here，here!-it is the beating of his horrible heart!'




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens





■ 1 Marley's ghost
　　It is important to remember that Jacob Marley was dead．Did Scrooge know that？Of course he did．
　　Scrooge and Marley had been partners in London for many years，and excellent men of business they were，too．When Marley died，Scrooge continued with the business alone．Both names still stood above the office door：Scrooge and Marley．Sometimes people who were new to the business called Scrooge Scrooge，and sometimes Marley，but he answered to both names．He did not care what name they called him．The only thing that mattered to him was the business，and making money．
　　Oh！He was a hard，clever，mean old man，Scrooge was！ There was nothing warm or open about him．He lived a secretive，lonely life，and took no interest in other people at all．The cold inside him made his eyes red，and his thin lips blue，and his voice high and cross．It put white frost on his old head，his eyebrows and his chin．The frost in his heart made the air around him cold，too．In the hottest days of summer his office was as cold as ice，and it was just as cold in winter．
　　Nobody ever stopped him in the street to say，with a happy smile，‘My dear Scrooge，how are you？When will you come to see me？’No poor man asked him for money，no children asked him the time，no man or woman ever，in all his life， asked him the way．Animals as well as people were afraid of him．Dogs used to hide in doorways when they saw him coming．But what did Scrooge care！It was just what he wanted．He liked being on the edge of people's busy lives，while warning everyone to keep away from him．
　　One Christmas Eve，old Scrooge was working busily in his office．It was cold，frosty，foggy weather．Outside it was already dark，although it was only three o'clock in the afternoon，and there were candles in all the office windows The fog covered everything，like a thick grey blanket．
　　Scrooge kept his office door open，in order to check that his clerk，Bob Cratchit，was working．Bob spent his days in a dark little room，a kind of cupboard，next to his employer's office．Scrooge had a very small fire，but Bob's fire was much smaller．It was very cold in the cupboard，and Bob had to wear his long white scarf to try to keep warm．
　　‘Merry Christmas，uncle！God bless you！’cried a happy voice．Scrooge's nephew had arrived．
　　‘Bah！’said Scrooge crossly．‘Humbug！’
　　‘Christmas is humbug！Surely you don't mean that， uncle？’said his nephew．
　　‘I do，’said scrooge．‘Why do you call it“merry”Christmas？You're too poor to be merry．’
　　‘Well，’replied the nephew，smiling，‘why are you so cross？You're too rich to be unhappy．’
　　‘of course I'm cross，’answered the uncle，‘when I live in a world full of stupid people like you！You say“Merry Christmas”！But what is Christmas？Just a time when you spend too much，when you find yourself a year older and not an hour richer，when you have to pay your bills．Everyone who goes around saying“Merry Christmas”should have his tongue cut out．Yes，he should！’
　　‘Uncle！Please don't say that！’said the nephew．‘I've always thought of Christmas as a time to be helpful and kind to other People．It's the only time of the year when men and women open their hearts freely to each other．And so，uncle， although I've never made any money from it，I think Christmas has been and will be a good time for me！And I say，God bless Christmas！’
　　Bob，in the cupboard，agreed loudly，without thinking．He immediately realized his mistake，and went quickly back to his work，but Scrooge had heard him．
　　‘If I hear another sound from you，’said Scrooge，‘you'll lose you job！’
　　‘Don't be angry with him，uncle，’said the nephew．‘come and have dinner with us tomorrow．’
　　‘Dinner with you？I'll see you dead first！’
　　‘But why won't you come？Why？’
　　‘Because Christmas is humbug！Good afternoon！’
　　‘I want nothing from you．I ask nothing of you．Why can't we be friends？’
　　‘Good afternoon！’said Scrooge．
　　‘I am sorry，with all my heart，to find you like this．I have never wanted to argue with you．But I came to see you and invite you because it's Christmas，and so I'll say，a merry Christmas，uncle！’
　　‘Good afternoon，’said Scrooge．
　　‘And a happy new year！’
　　‘Good afternoon！’said Scrooge．
　　His nephew left the room，without an angry word，stopping only to wish Bob Cratchit a merry Christmas．
　　Then two other gentlemen came in．They were large，round，comfortable-looking men，with books and papers in their hands．
　　‘This is Scrooge and Marley's，I think，’said one of them， looking at the papers that he was carrying．‘Am I speaking to Mr Scrooge or Mr Marley？’
　　‘Mr Marley is dead，’scrooge replied．‘He died seven years ago today，on Christmas Eve．’
　　‘I'm sure that you are just as kind to the poor as your partner，’said the gentleman，smiling．
　　What was true was that Scrooge was just as mean as Marley，and Marley had been just as mean as Scrooge．
　　‘At this happy time of year，Mr Scrooge，’the gentleman went on，taking up his pen，‘we should help poor people who have no food or clothes or homes．’
　　‘Are there no prisons？’asked Scrooge coldly．
　　‘Plenty of prisons，’said the gentleman．
　　‘And the workhouses，where poor people can live and work？Are they still open？’
　　‘Yes，they are，I'm sorry to say．’
　　‘I'm happy to hear It，’said Scrooge．‘I thought，from what you said at first，that perhaps these useful places were closed，for some reason．’
　　‘But some of us feel，’replied the gentleman，‘that these places don't offer enough to poor people．We're hoping to give some meat and drink，and wood for a fire，to people who need all these things．This is a time when we should all be able to enjoy ourselves．How much will you give，sir？’
　　‘Nothing！’scrooge replied．‘I don't have a merry Christmas myself，and I won't pay for other people to be merry．We all have to pay for prisons and workhouses—they cost enough．The poor will have to go there．’
　　‘Many can't go there，and many prefer to die．’
　　‘If they prefer to die，why don't they die，then？There are too many people in the world，so it's a good thing if some of them die．All this is none of my business！It's enough for a man to understand his own business，and not to think about other people's．I'm a very busy man．Good afternoon，gentlemen！’
　　The gentlemen shook their heads a little sadly，and left the office．Scrooge went back to his work，feeling pleased with himself．
　　Now the fog was at its thickest outside，and the cold was biting．Lights shone brightly from the shop windows．People were hurrying here and there—rich and poor alike－to buy what they needed for tomorrow's Christmas dinner．
　　At last it was time to close the office．Scrooge got up slowly from his desk．Bob was waiting for this moment，and he immediately put on his hat．
　　‘You'll want a holiday all day tomorrow，I suppose？’said Scrooge．
　　‘If you don't mind，sir．’
　　‘I do mind．It's not fair．I have to pay you for a day's work when you don't do any work．’
　　‘It's only once a year，sir，’said Bob politely．
　　‘That's no reason for robbing me every twenty-fifth of December！’said Scrooge，putting on his coat．‘But I suppose you must have it．Be here early next morning．’
　　‘Yes，sir，I will，I promise，’Bob said happily．Scrooge walked out，without another word．When bob had closed the office，he ran home to his family in Camden Town as quickly as possible．
　　Scrooge always used to eat his dinner alone，in the same miserable little eating-house．Tonight was no different from other nights．He read the newspapers，looked at his bank books， and went home to bed．He lived in rooms which had once belonged to his dead partner．They were in an old，dark building in a lonely side street，where no one except Scrooge lived．
　　In the blackness of the night，through the fog and the frost， Scrooge had to feel his way along the street with his hands．He finally reached his front door and put the key in the lock．Suddenly，to his great surprise，he saw that the knocker was not a knocker any more，but had become the face of Jacob Marley！
　　He had not thought of his partner for seven years，until that afternoon，when he spoke Marley's name to his visitors．But there in front of him was Marley's face，white and ghostly， with terrible staring eyes．
　　As Scrooge looked，it became a knocker again．He was afraid，but he did not show his fear．He turned the key， opened the door and walked in．He did look around before he shut the door，and he did look behind the door，to see if anyone was hiding there．But there was nothing there．He shut the door with a bang，to show that he was not afraid．
　　With his one candle he went slowly up the stairs．It was impossible to see into all the dark corners．Darkness was cheap， and Scrooge liked it．But he remembered the face，so he walked through all his rooms，checking that everything was all right．Nobody under the table or the bed，nobody behind the door！On the small fire in the bedroom there was a pot of soup，and Scrooge's bowl was ready on the table．Nobody in any of the rooms！Sure that he was safe now，Scrooge shut and locked his bedroom door behind him．He sat down by the fire to eat his soup．
　　The fireplace was an old one，with hundreds of pictures on the tiles around the fire．But Scrooge could only see Marley's face on every tile．
　　‘Humbug！’said Scrooge to the tiles，and walked across the room．When he sat down again，he noticed a bell on the other side of the room．As he looked，he saw，with great surprise and fear，that the bell was slowly beginning to move from side to side．Soon it was ringing loudly，and so was every bell in the house．
　　Suddenly they all stopped ringing at the same moment，and then came a strange noise from down below．It sounded like someone pulling heavy chains across the floor．Scrooge remembered hearing that ghosts in old houses sometimes pulled chains behind them．Then a door below opened with a crash，and the noise started coming up the stairs．It was coming towards his door．
　　‘It's humbug still！’cried Scrooge．But the colour left his face when，without stopping，it came straight through the heavy，locked door，and appeared in front of him．It was Marley's ghost！
　　Scrooge could see right through its body．Around its middle was a long chain，which had money-boxes，keys，bank books， and heavy purses on it．The ghost's death-cold eyes stared fixedly at Scrooge．
　　‘Well！’said Scrooge，trying to pretend that nothing strange was happening．‘What do you want？And who are you？’
　　‘In life I was your partner，Jacob Marley．’
　　‘It's humbug，I tell you！’said Scrooge．‘There are no ghosts！’But when he said this，the ghost gave a terrible cry， and shook its chain in a very frightening way．At once Scrooge fell on the ground in great fear，crying，‘Yes！Yes！You are real！I see that now！Why have you come？Why do ghosts come back from the dead？Tell me，Jacob！’
　　‘The spirit of every man who does not help other people in life has to travel endlessly through the world after his death．We have to carry the chains that we made for ourselves in our lifetime．Do you，Ebenezer Scrooge，recognize my chain？It is very like the one that you wear！’
　　Scrooge looked around him，but could see no chain．‘Jacob，’he said，‘please tell me more！’
　　‘I cannot help you much，Ebenezer！I cannot rest，I cannot stay anywhere for long．I have been dead for seven years and all that time I have been travelling on the wings of the wind！ No peace，no rest for me in death，because I was never good or kind in life！’
　　‘But you were always a good man of business，Jacob，’said Scrooge，who was now beginning to worry about his own life．
　　‘Business！’cried the ghost miserably．‘Why didn't I think of people as my business？I thought only about making money，not about being kind and helpful to other people．Listen to me，Ebenezer！I am here tonight to warn you．You still have a chance to save yourself from what has happened to me．Three spirtis will come to visit you：the first tomorrow at one o'clock，the second at the same time the next night，and the third at midnight the following night．You will not see me any more，and for your own peace after death，remember what I have told you！’
　　The spirit walked slowly backwards to the window，which began to open．When the ghost reached the window，it held up its hand，and Scrooge listened．He could hear a noise of sad crying in the air．The spirit began to cry，too，and it moved out into the frosty，dark night to join the others．Scrooge ran to the window．Outside，the air was full of spirits，all wearing chains like Marley's ghost，all crying miserably as they realized，too late，the terrible mistakes that they had made in their lives．
　　Little by little，the spirits and their voices disappeared into the fog and the darkness，and the night was silent again．Scrooge closed the window，and checked his bedroom door．It was still locked．He started to say，‘Humbug！’but stopped suddenly．Perhaps because he was very tired，or because it was late，he went straight to bed，without taking off his clothes，and fell asleep immediately．






■ 2 The first of the three spirits
　　When Scrooge woke up，it was very dark in the room．He heard the church clock start striking，and listened to see what the time was．To his great surprise，the heavy bell went on striking up to twelve，then stopped．Twelve o'clock！ It was past two in the morning when he had gone to bed．The clock must be wrong！He looked at his watch．It said twelve o'clock too！
　　‘Have I slept all day？Is it the next night already？’scrooge asked himself．‘Or has something happened to the sun？Perhaps it's midday，not midnight！But that's impossible！’
　　He climbed out of bed，and felt his way to the window．But there was nobody outside in the dark，foggy streets，and he realized it must be night-time．He went back to bed again，but could not sleep．He was worried，because he could not understand what was happening．‘Was Marley's ghost a dream？’he wondered．‘But it seemed very real…’
　　He lay awake until he heard the clock striking a quarter to the hour．Suddenly he remembered．The ghost had warned him that a spirit would visit him at one o'clock．He decided to stay awake until one o'clock had passed．The quarter of an hour passed very slowly，but at last he heard the clock striking the four quarters．
　　‘It's one o'clock！’cried Scrooge delightedly，‘and nothing has happened！’But he spoke before the hour bell had sounded．The clock now struck a deep，sad ONE，and immediately light shone into Scrooge's bedroom．The curtains round his bed were pulled open．Scrooge sat up in bed，and stared at his ghostly visitor．
　　A strange figure，half like a child，half like an old man， looked back at him．It had long，white hair，but its skin was soft and young．It wore a short，white robe，covered with both summer and winter flowers．But the strangest thing about it was that from the top of its head shone a bright，clear light．Perhaps this light was sometimes too bright，because under one arm it carried a hat，which looked like a large extinguisher．
　　‘Who and what are you，sir？’asked Scrooge．
　　‘I am the ghost of Christmas Past，’replied the spirit，in a soft，gentle voice．
　　‘Do you mean long ago in the past？’asked Scrooge．
　　‘No．Your past．’
　　‘Spirit，please tell me why you are here．’
　　‘I am here for your own good，’answered the ghost．
　　‘Thank you，’replied Scrooge politely．But secretly he thought，‘Bah！A night of unbroken sleep is a more useful thing to have！’
　　The spirit seemed to hear him thinking，and said at once，‘I am here to help you change your life！Watch and listen！’It put out a strong hand，and held Scrooge by the arm．‘Get up，and come with me！’
　　It was dark and cold outside．Scrooge did not want to go anywhere，and for a moment he thought about pretending to be too ill to go out．But he did not like to refuse，so he said nothing，and got out of bed．Together they passed through the wall of the house out into the darkness．
　　Suddenly Scrooge realized they were standing on an open country road，with fields on each side．London，the fog，and the darkness had all disappeared，and it was a clear，cold， winter day，with snow on the ground．
　　‘Good Heavens！’cried Scrooge．‘I was born near here！I rememher it well！’
　　The spirit looked kindly at the old man．‘How strange that you've forgotten it for so many years！What is that on your face？Are you crying？’
　　Scrooge put a hand over his eyes．‘It's nothing—I've got a cold，that's all．Take me where you want，spirit！’
　　Scrooge recognized every field，post，and tree，as they walked along the road towards a little market town．All around thgm were young schoolboys on horses and in farmers’carts，laughing and wishing each other a merry Christmas，as they travelled to their homes for the Christmas holiday．
　　‘They are only shadows from the past，’said the spirit．‘They cannot see us．’
　　Scrooge knew and named all of them．Why was he so delighted to see them？Why did his cold heart beat faster when they went past，shouting‘Merry Christmas！’？What was‘merry Christmas’to Scrooge？What good had it ever done to him？
　　‘Not everyone has left the school，’said the ghost．‘There is one lonely child there still，one child whose friends have all gone．’
　　‘I know！’said Scrooge．And now he was crying openly．
　　They turned into a smaller road，and soon came to the school．Inside，in the long，cold，silent classroom，a lonely boy sat reading near a small fire．When he saw his poor forgotten past self，Scrooge sat down at one of the desks，put his head in his hands and cried．
　　‘Poor boy！I wish—but it's too late now．’
　　‘What's the matter？’asked the spirit．
　　‘There was a boy singing Christmas carols at my door yesterday．I'm sorry I didn't give him anything，that's all．’
　　The ghost smiled，and lifted its hand，saying，‘Let's see another past Christmas！’
　　The schoolroom became darker and dirtier．There was the young Scrooge again，a little older and bigger than before．He was not reading this time，but was walking up and down， looking very unhappy．The door opened，and a little girl， much younger than him，came running in．Putting her arms round his neck，she said lovingly to him，‘I've come to bring you home，dear brother！Father is so much kinder than he used to be！The other day I asked him if you could come home，and he said yes！And we're going to spend Christmas together，and have the merriest time！’she was laughing delightedly as she began to pull him towards the door．They went out happily together，hand in hand．
　　‘What a warm heart she had！’said the ghost．
　　‘You're right，’said Scrooge．‘I agree with you，spirit！’
　　‘She married，I understand，’continued the ghost，‘and had children，I think，before she died．’
　　‘One child，’answered Scrooge．
　　‘True，’said the ghost．‘Your nephew！’
　　Scrooge did not answer at once．‘Yes，’he said at last．
　　Now the school had disappeared，and they were in the middle of a busy town，with shadowy crowds and carts all around them．Here it was Christmas time again，but it was evening， and there were lights in the shops and streets．
　　The ghost stopped at an office door．‘Do you know this place，Scrooge？’he asked．
　　‘Know it！’cried Scrooge．‘Why，I was a clerk here！’
　　They went in，and when they saw a large，kind-looking old gentleman sitting at a high desk，Scrooge cried excitedly，‘Good Heavens，it's old Fezziwig！God bless him！It's Fezziwig alive again！’
　　Old Fezziwig put down his pen，and looked at the clock．Fastening his coat buttons over his fat stomach，he started laughing as he called out in a rich，deep，happy voice， ‘Ebenezer！Dick！Seven o'clock！No more work tonight！It'sChristmas Eve，remember！’
　　The young Scrooge hurried in，with another clerk．
　　‘That's Dick Wilkins！’said Scrooge quietly to the ghost．
　　‘He always liked me．Oh dear！poor Dick！’
　　Together the two young clerks put away all the pens and papers，and，following Fezziwig's orders，cleared all the furniture away from the centre of the room．In came a fiddler．In came Mrs Fezziwig，fat and smiling．In came the three Fezziwig daughters，sweet and pretty．In came the six young men who were in love with them．In came the cook，with her young man，the milkman．In came the boy from next door， with the girl from the house opposite．In they came，some quietly，some noisily，but all happy because it was Ghristmas Eve．The fiddler started playing，and away they all went in the dance，twenty pairs at the same time，round and round， down the middle and up again．When they were all tired，old Fezziwig cried out，‘Well done！Now，have something to eat and drink！’there was cake and hot meat and bread and cold meat and fruit，and all kinds of drinks，on a long table near the door．And after they had eaten，they danced again．
　　When the clock struck eleven，the dancing ended．Mr and Mrs Fezziwig stood by the door，shaking hands with each person as he or she went out，and wishing him or her a merry Christmas．
　　During this time Scrooge had thought of nothing except what was happening in front of his eyes．He remembered and enjoyed it all with the greatest delight．But when the dancing came to an end，he realized that the ghost was looking at him．The light on the spirit's head was burning very clearly．
　　‘It seems easy enough to amuse these childish people，’said the ghost．‘It was nothing much that Fezziwig did，was it？ After all，he only spent a few pounds，on food and drink and paying the fiddler．’
　　‘It isn't a question of money，’replied Scrooge warmly．He was speaking like the young man he used to be，not the old man he was now．‘No，spirit，you see，our employer can make us happy or sad．His words，his looks，all these things are so important！The happiness that he gives is just as valuable as money！’
　　He suddenly stopped speaking，when he felt the spirit watching him closely．
　　‘What's the matter？’asked the ghost．
　　‘Er—nothing，’said Scrooge．‘Just that—I'd like to be able to say a word or two to my clerk now．’
　　Now Scrooge could see himself again．He was older now， and it was clear that he was beginning to show an unhealthy interest in money．His eyes were restless，and his mouth looked thin and mean．He was not alone，but was sitting beside a lovely young girl．The light that shone brightly from the ghost of Christmas Past showed that she was crying．
　　‘I know it doesn't matter very much to you，’she said softly．‘You care about gold more than you care about me．Perhaps I shouldn't be sad．Money will give you the happiness that I wanted to give you．’
　　‘But I haven't changed towards you，have I？’
　　‘You have changed．We promised to marry a long time ago，when we were both poor，and happy to be poor．I have stayed the same，but you have different hopes and dreams now．I loved the man that you used to be，but I know that you do not wish to marry me any more．So I've come to tell you that you're free．Be happy in the life that you've chosen！’And she left him．
　　‘Spirit！’cried Scrooge．‘Show me no more！Take me home！This is too painful！’
　　‘One shadow more！’said the ghost．
　　‘No more！’cried Scrooge．‘I don't wish to see any more！’But the spirit held his arms，and he could not escape．
　　Now they were in another place，in a room which was not very large，but comfortable．Near the fire sat a beautiful young girl．Scrooge thought she was the girl that he had just seen，until he saw her，now a good-looking married lady，sitting opposite her daughter．The room was full of children，and noise，and shouting，and laughing．Just then the door opened， and the father entered，carrying a great pile of Christmas presents．The noise became twice as loud，as the children received their presents with delight，and kissed their father gratefully．Finally，the younger ones went upstairs to bed，and Scrooge watched more sadly than ever，as the father sat down with his loving daughter and her mother by the fire．
　　‘Belle，’said the husband，turning to his wife with a smile，‘I saw an old friend of yours this afternoon．Guess who？ Mr Scrooge！He was sitting alone in his office．His partner is dying，and I don't think he has any other friends．’
　　‘Spirit！’said Scrooge in a broken voice．‘Take me away from this place．’
　　‘These are shadows of the things that happened in the past，’said the ghost．‘You chose the life that you preferred， so why cry now？’
　　‘I can't watch any more！It's too awful！Leave me alone， spirit！’And Scrooge，noticing that the ghostly light was burning high and bright，suddenly took the extinguisher，and pushed it down hard on the spirit's head．But although it covered the ghost's head and body，Scrooge could not hide the light，which continued to shine out strongly from underneath．
　　Now Scrooge found himself back in his own bedroom again．Feeling very tired，he climbed into bed and at once fell into a deep，heavy sleep．






■ 3 The second of the three spirits
　　When Scrooge woke up，he realized immediately that the church clock was just going to strike one．He felt sure that the second spirit would Soon visit him．This time he wanted to be ready，so he pulled back all the curtains round his bed himself，and lay there，waiting．At one o'clock，instead of a spirit，a strong light shone down on Scrooge's bed．He felt very frightened．After a few minutes he thought that perhaps the light was coming from the next room，so he got up and went to the door．When he touched it，a strange voice called his name，and asked him to enter．He obeyed．
　　Although he recognized it as his own room，it looked very different now．The walls were covered with bright green leaves，and there was a good fire burning in the fireplace．On the floor were big plies of the best Christmas food—wonderful rich dark cakes，warm soft bread，colourful apples and oranges，plates of yellow butter，cooked chickens，boxes of chocolates and sugared sweets．Sitting beside all this was a large，smiling spirit，who called out cheerfully to Scrooge， ‘Come in！Chme in，man！I am the ghost of Christmas Present！Look at me！’
　　Since the first ghost's visit，Scrooge was no longer very sure of himself．So although the spirit's eyes were clear and kind，Scrooge was afraid to look straight into its face．But he could see that its body was dressed in a long green robe，its long brown hair fell freely down its back，and its face wore a warm and friendly smile．Light shone from the torch which it was holding in its strong right hand．
　　‘Spirit，’said Scrooge quietly，‘take me where you want．Last night I learned a lesson which is working now．If you have anything to teach me tonight，let me learn from you．’
　　‘Touch my robe！’said the spirit，and Scrooge obeyed．
　　The food，the room，the fire all disappeared，and they were standing outside in the cold，snowy streets on Christmas morning．Althought the sky was grey and the streets were dirty，the people looked surprisingly cheerful，as they hurried to the bakers'shops with their Christmas dinners，all ready for cooking．The spirit seemed specially interested in poor people．He stood with Scrooge in a baker's doorway and held his torch over the dinners as they were carried past him．Sometimes，when he saw people pushing each other or getting angry，he lifted his torch over their heads，and immediately they became kinder，or stopped arguing，‘because it's Christmas，’they told each other．
　　‘What does your torch do，spirit？’asked Scrooge．
　　‘It gives a special taste to people's dinners on this day，’answered the spirit．
　　‘Why do you use it most on poor people？’said Scrooge．
　　‘Because poor people need it most，’was the reply．
　　They went on through London，and came to the small house where Scrooge's clerk lived．Here the spirit smiled，and held his torch high over the door．Inside，Bob Cratchit's wife and second daughter，Belinda，in their everyday dresses，but looking clean and pretty，were putting plates on the table for their Christmas dinner．Bob's son Peter was helping to cook the potatoes，and two smaller Cratchits，a boy and a girl，were running round excitedly．Just then the eldest daughter，Martha，arrived home from work．
　　‘Here's Martha，mother！’cried the two young Cratchits happily．‘We're having a really big chicken for dinner， Martha！’In fact it was only a small chicken，but it seemed large to the excited children．
　　‘My dear，how late you are！’said Mrs Cratchit，kissing her daughter several times．
　　‘We were so busy yesterday，mother！’replied the girl．‘That's why we didn't finish until this morning！’
　　‘Well！Never mind，now that you're here．God bless you！ Sit down by the fire，my dear！’
　　‘No，no！Father's coming！’ried the two young Cratchits．‘Hide，Martha，hide！’
　　So Martha hid herself，and in came Bob in his thin coat and long white scarf，with his son Tiny Tim in his arms．Poor Tiny Tim！He had not walked since he was born，and although he could pull himself and his thin little legs along with the help of a wooden crutch，he was not strong enough to travel far alone．
　　‘Why，where's Martha？’cried Bob，looking round．
　　‘Not coming，’said Mrs Cratchit．
　　‘Not coming！’repeated Bob，his cheerful smile disappearing．‘Not coming on Christmas Day！’
　　But Martha didn't like to worry her father for a minute，so she ran out from behind the door and kissed him， while the two young Cratchits showed Tiny Tim the chicken，now ready to eat．
　　Scrooge and the spirit watched as the family sat down to eat．It was a poor enough meal，but to them it seemed wonderful，and they ate every bit of it．
　　‘It's the best chicken I've ever tasted，’said Bob， smiling round at his family， who， with their mouths full，all agreed．
　　And then，the most exciting moment of the day！Belinda put a clean plate in front of each person， and they all turned to look at Mrs Cratchit as she came in from the kitchen．Her face was hot from her morning's work， but she was smiling happily as she carried in-the Christmas pudding， in its little circle of blue fire！
　　Oh，it was a wonderful pudding！They were all delighted with it．
　　‘It's your greatest success in all the years that we've been married，my dear！’said Bob．
　　‘Well，I did wonder how much fruit to put in it，’said his wife，‘but， yes， it's a good one！’And she laughed just like a young girl．
　　Nobody said that it was a very small pudding for a large family．Nobody even thought it．No Cratchit ever said or thought things like that．
　　At last，when they had finished their meal，the children cleared the table and washed the plates．Then they all sat round the fire， eating apples and oranges．There was a large bowl of fruit and sugar and hot water and something a little stronger，but only three people could drink at the same time， because the family only owned two glasses and a cup．But this did not worry the Cratchits at all．Now Bob lifted his glass and said，‘A merry Christmas to us all， my dears！ God bless us！’
　　The family repeated his wish，and Tiny Tim said，last of all，‘God bless us every one！’He sat very close to his father， on a small chair．Bob held his son's thin little hand in this own．The boy had a special place in his father's heart．
　　‘Spirit，’said Scrooge，with an interest that he had never felt before，‘ tell me if Tiny Tim will live．’
　　‘In the future I see an empty chair by the fire， with a crutch beside it．If these shadows do not change， the child will die．’
　　‘No，no！’said Scrooge．‘Oh no，kind spirit！Say that he will live！’
　　‘If his life does not change soon， he will die before next Christmas．What does that matter？There are too many people in the world，so it's a good thing if some of them die．’
　　Scrooge was ashamed and sad to hear his own words spoken by the spirit．But he lifted his head when he heard his name．
　　‘Mr Scrooge！’said Bob．‘Let's drink to Mr Scrooge， whose money has paid for this meal！’
　　‘His money！’said Mrs Cratchit angrily．‘What can we buy with his fifteen shillings a week？ Why should we drink to the health of a hateful，hard，unfeeling，mean old man like Scrooge？’
　　‘My dear，’said Bob gently，‘remember it's Christmas．’
　　‘Well，Bob， I'll drink to his health only because of you and because it's Christmas．Long life to Mr Scrooge！A merry Christmas and a happy new year to him！ He'll be very merry and very happy，I'm sure！’
　　When the children heard Scrooge's name，a dark shadow came over their happiness for a while，and they were quiet and a little sad．But five minutes later they were talking，and laughing，and telling stories，ten times merrier than before．They were not a good-looking or a well-dressed family， but they were happy and grateful and loved each other．As they disappeared in the light of the spirit's torch，Scrooge could not take his eyes off them， especially Tiny Tim．
　　By this time it was getting dark，and snowing heavily．The spirit took Scrooge into many houses，where fires were burning cheerfully，and food was cooking，and people were merrily welcoming their friends and families into their homes．The ghost was delighted to see all this excitement，and made sure that he lifted his torch over every poor family，to give them more fun，and better food，and greater happiness．
　　Then the spirit took Scrooge away from the busy capital，to a wild，lonely place in the country，where no trees grew．Here they visited a small stone house， a long way from any town or village， where an old man and woman were singing Christmas carols，with their children and grandchildren．The spirit did not stay long here， but told Scrooge to hold his robe again．
　　‘Where are we going？ Not up in the air， surely！’And Scrooge，terribly frightened，looked down as they flew over the land and then over the sea．It was stormy， windy weather， and the waves crashed violently underneath them．
　　The spirit took Scrooge to a lighthouse built on a lonely rock， several miles from land．A light was kept burning at the top， in order to warn sailors to keep away from the dangerous rocks．Two men lived here in this cold， unfriendly place， far away from their families，but the spirit smiled to see them shake hands，wish each other a merry Christmas，and sing a carol together in front of their fire．
　　Again the spirit and Scrooge flew on，and together they landed on a ship in the middle of the sea．Here every man， although many miles from home，had a kind word for his friend， or thought warmly of his family，because it was Christmas．
　　It was a great surprise to Scrooge，while listening to the noise of the wind and waves，to hear a happy laugh．He recognized it as his nephew's，and found himself，with the smiling spirit beside him，in his nephew's bright，warm sitting-room．
　　When Scrooge's nephew laughed，everybody who was with him wanted to laugh too．He had that kind of laugh．And at the moment， his very pretty wife and several of his friends were laughing with him．
　　‘He said that Christmas was humbug！Ha ha ha！’cried Scrooge's nephew．
　　‘That's very bad of him，Fred！’said his wife．
　　‘He's a strange old man，’said Scrooge's nephew，‘but I'm sorry for him．His money is no use to him，you see．He isn't at all happy or comfortable，although he's rich．It's sad to think of him sitting alone in his cold room．And so I'm going to invite him every Christmas．He can be cross and miserable if be likes，but I'll go on inviting him and one day perhaps he'll think better of Christmas！’
　　After tea，the cheerful little group sang songs，and played music．Scrooge recognized the song that his little sister used to sing， and remembered sadly what the ghost of Christmas Past had shown him．Later the friends played guessing games，and Scrooge joined in the games with delight．Nobody except the spirit could hear him，but he often guessed the right answer．
　　‘It's time to go now，’said the ghost，smiling at the old man's childish excitement．
　　‘No，spirit，please，let me stay a little longer．Look， they're playing a new game！’
　　It was a game called Yes and No，in which Scrooge's nephew had to think of something，and the others had to ask questions to discover what it was．The only possible answers were Yes or No．Scrooge heard that Fred was thinking of a living animal，a wild animal，sometimes an angry animal， which lived in London and walked in the streets．Every time he answered a question，Fred could not stop himself laughing．At last，his wife's dark， pretty sister started laughing too．
　　‘I know what it is，Fred！I know！’she cried out．‘It's your uncle Scro-o-o-o-oge！’
　　Everyone laughed until they cried．What a wonderful game！ What a clever idea of Fred's！But at last Fred dried his eyes， and said，‘We've been very merry because of him， so I think we should drink to his health．Here's to Uncle Scrooge！A merry Christmas and a happy new year to the old man！Uncle Scrooge！’
　　‘To Uncle Scrooge！’they all cried，cheerfully lifting their glasses．
　　Uncle Scrooge wanted to thank them，but the spirit hurried him away．The ghost seemed much older now： his brown hair had become grey．
　　‘Are spirits' lives so short？’asked Scrooge．
　　‘My life in this world ends at midnight tonight．Listen！It's a quarter to midnight now！’
　　The church clock was striking the three quarters．
　　‘Excuse me for asking，spirit，’said Scrooge，‘but what are those strange things near your foot？’
　　‘Oh man， look here！’said the spirit sadly，and brought out from under his robe two ghostly figures， a boy and a girl．They were thin and poorly dressed， with cold， mean eyes and dry，yellow skin， and their faces showed only a frightening and murderous hate．Scrooge had never seen anything so terrible or so sad．
　　‘These miserable children are Man's，’said the spirit．‘The boy is Crime．The girl is Need．They will destroy Man if nothing is done about them．’
　　‘Can't anyone help them？’cried Scrooge．
　　‘Are there no prisons？’said the spirit，turning on Scrooge for the last time with his own words．‘Are there on workhouses？’
　　The clock struck twelve．Scrooge looked，but could no longer see the ghost or the children．He was alone again．






■ 4 The last of the spirits
　　‘The third spirit will come at midnight．’scrooge suddenly remembered the words of Jacob Marley's ghost，and，lifting his eyes，saw a spirit，all in black，coming slowly towards him．It was a tall，silent figure，wearing a long black robe which hid its head and body．When it came close to him，it stopped and pointed onwards with one hand．Scrooge was more afraid of this spirit than he had been of the others，and his voice was shaking as he asked，‘Are you the spirit of Christmas Yet to Come？’the ghost neither spoke nor moved，but still pointed onwards．
　　‘Are you going to show me shadows of the things which haven't happened yet， but will happen in the future？’scrooge asked．
　　There was no answer．
　　‘Ghost of the future！’he continued．‘You frighten me very much，but I think you can help me to change my life．I'll be very grateful to you if you show me the future．Won't you speak to me？’
　　Again，no reply．
　　‘Well，show me the way，spirit！’said Scrooge finally．‘The night is passing，and time is valuable to me，I know．’
　　The ghost moved away，with Scrooge following in its shadow．Suddenly they were in the heart of the capital，among the businessmen and moneylenders．The ghost pointed to one small group of men，so Scrooge went closer to listen to their conversation．
　　‘No，I don't know much about it，’said one fat man．‘I only know he's dead．’
　　‘When did he die？’asked another man．
　　‘Last night，I think．’
　　‘Why，what was the matter with him？’asked a third．
　　‘I've no idea，’replied the fat man，looking bored．‘who cares？’
　　‘What's he done with his money？’asked a red-faced gentleman．
　　‘I haven't heard，’said the fat man．‘He hasn't left it to me， that's all I know．’
　　They all laughed at this．Scrooge knew the men， and looked towards the spirit， hoping it would explain what the conversation meant．But the ghost moved on，pointing at two more men．Scrooge listened again．He knew these men well．They were rich and important， and he had often done business with them．
　　‘How are you？’said one．
　　‘How are you？’replied the other．
　　‘Well！’said the first．‘The old man has died at last，has he？’
　　‘So they tell me，’replied the second．‘Cold，isn't it？’
　　‘Nice and frosty for Christmas．Good morning！’
　　Not another word．That was the end of their meeting．
　　Scrooge wondered why the spirit wanted him to hear these conversations．What could they mean？The dead man could not be his partner Jacob，because he was already dead．
　　Scrooge watched carefully，trying to understand．He looked round for his own shadow，but could not see himself anywhere．‘Perhaps that's not surprising，’he thought，‘because if I change my life，and I'm planning to do that，I won't be the same person in the future！’Just then he noticed the spirit，standing quiet and dark beside him， with its pointing hand．He felt the unseen eyes staring fixedly at him behind the black robe Scrooge's body shook，and he felt cold．
　　They left the busy offices and banks，and went to another part of the capital，where Scrooge had never been before．The streets were narrow and dirty，the houses miserably poor，the people unwashed and half-dressed．Down one street there was a small shop， where an old man was sitting waiting for customers．His business was buying old furniture or clothes，and selling them again，to the poorest people in London．As Scrooge and the spirit watched，three women arrived at the shop door at the same time， each carrying a large bundle．They looked very surprised and a little ashamed to see each other．Suddenly they all started laughing．
　　‘Ladies，you couldn't find a better place to meet，’said Joe， the old man，getting up．‘Now come inside，and show me what you've got to sell．’
　　Inside，the first woman put her bundle on the table and said，‘I don't care if everybody knows where this comes from！ We all have to take care of ourselves！ He always did！’
　　‘That's right，’agreed the second woman．
　　‘Very true，’agreed the third．
　　‘Does a dead man need these things？’continued the first woman．‘And why was he so mean while he was alive？’We all worked for him，didn't we？ Cleaned his house，washed his clothes，cooked his soup？ And what did we get？Three shillings a week！It's no surprise that he died alone， with no friends around him！’
　　‘You never spoke a truer word，’said the second．
　　‘He was a bad man，we all know that，’said the third．
　　‘Now what have we here？’said old Joe，opening the women's bundles．‘Buttons，pencils，boots，silver spoons，some excellent bed-curtains，blankets and—a very good shirt，’he added，feeling the fine cotton．
　　‘Yes，it was his best，’said the first woman．‘They put it on him after he died．But he doesn't need it now that he's dead！And the blankets and bed-curtains！He doesn't need them either！
　　‘You took the shirt off a dead body，and the blankets and curtains off his bed，while he was lying there！Well，well！’said Joe，shaking his head．‘Here's your money．’And he counted out several shillings into the women's hands．
　　‘Ha ha ha！’laughed the first woman．‘He frightened everyone away when he was alive，and we've made money out of him now that he's dead！ Ha ha ha！’
　　Scrooge felt sick and angry at the same time．‘Spirit，’he said，‘I see now．I could be that unhappy man．Good Heavens， what's this？’
　　Joe and the women had disappeared，and Scrooge was standing in a dark room．Opposite him was a bed， with no blankets or curtains．A light shone down from above，on to the body of a dead man，covered with a sheet．
　　‘How sad，’thought Scrooge，‘to die with no friends or family around him！ To lie in an empty room，with no candles or flowers，and robbed of his clothes！To know that nobody loves him， because he loved nobody in his life！Money can't buy a happy life，or a peaceful death！’He looked at the spirit， whose hand was pointing at the man's covered head．It would be easy to lift the sheet，and see who the man was．But for some reason Scrooge could not do it．
　　‘Spirit，’he said，‘this is a terrible place．Let's go！’
　　Still the ghost's unmoving finger pointed at the man's head．
　　‘I understand you，but I can't look at him，spirit，I can't！’said Scrooge wildly．‘If there's anyone in this town who feels anything at this man's death， show that person to me， spirit， please！’
　　For a moment the spirit lifted its dark robe like a wing，and showed Scrooge a room， where a mother and her children were sitting．The young woman kept looking at the clock，and when her husband arrived， she hurried to meet him．
　　‘What—what is the news？’she asked him worriedly．‘Is it good！…or… or bad？’
　　‘There is still hope，Caroline，’he replied．
　　‘How can there be hope？If that hard，mean old man wants us to pay back the money now，they'll send us to prison！We haven't got enough to pay him！’
　　‘He is dead，Caroline，’answered her husband．
　　‘Thank God for that！’cried the young woman from her heart．The next moment she realized what she had said．‘Oh， I didn't mean that．I'm sorry if anyone dies．’
　　‘Perhaps the person who inherits his business will give us more time to pay the money back．And we'll have the money by then．Tonight we can sleep well，Caroline！’
　　‘So，spirit，’said Scrooge in a broken voice，‘you can show me only happiness at this man's death．It frightens me，spirit．Show me，please，that there can be sadness at a death．’
　　The ghost took him silently through the streets，to poor Bob Cratchit's house．The room seemed strangely quiet．The mother and her daughters were making a small white cotton shirt together，while the usually noisy young Cratchits sat silently in a corner，and Peter was reading a book．Mrs Cratchit put her work down on the table，and covered her face with her hand．
　　‘The colour hurts my eyes，’she said．The colour？Ah，poor Tiny Tim！
　　They're a little better now，’she went on．‘It's difficult to work by candlelight．And I don't want to show red eyes to your father when he comes home．’
　　‘He's a bit late，’said Peter，‘but I think he's walked more slowly these last few days，mother．’
　　They were very quiet again．At last she said bravely，‘I've known him walk with—with Tiny Tim in his arms，very fast indeed．’
　　‘So have I，’cried Peter．‘Often！’
　　‘But he was very light to carry，and your father loved him so much！And there's your father at the door now！’she got up quickly to kiss Bob as he came in．He looked tired and thin， and needed his long scarf，poor man！Martha took his boots and scarf off，and Belinda brought him his tea，and the little Cratchits sat close to him．He was very cheerful with all of them，and was pleased with the little shirt that his wife and daughters were making．
　　‘It'll be ready long before Sunday，won't it？’he said．
　　‘Sunday！You went there today，then，Bob？’asked his wife．
　　‘Yes，my dear．You'd love to see it．It's a beautiful green place．But you'll see it often．I promised him that we would go there every Sunday．My little，little child！’cried Bob，hiding his face in his hands．He had loved the boy very much．
　　He went upstairs to the quiet bedroom，where the chlid lay．Poor Bob sat down beside him， and when he felt calmer， he kissed the little face，and went downstairs again，almost happy．
　　‘My dears，’he said to his children，‘one of these days some of you will marry and leave home．In a few year's time perhaps all of you will．But I'm sure none of us will ever forget Tiny Tim，will we？’
　　‘Never，father！’they all cried．
　　‘And I know，’said Bob，‘that when we remember how patient and gentle he was，although he was only a little child，we won't argue among ourselves．We'll remember poor Tiny Tim， and love each other！’
　　‘We will， father！’they all cried again．
　　‘I am very happy， said Bob．‘I am very happy！’mrs Cratchit kissed him，his daughters kissed him，the two young Cratchits kissed him， and he and Peter shook hands．Tiny Tim，your goodness lives on in your family！
　　‘Spirit，’said Scrooge，‘I know that you will leave me soon．Tell me who that dead man on the bed was！’
　　No answer came in words， but the ghost of Christmas Yet to Come took Scrooge through the streets of London again．
　　‘Wait a moment，’said Scrooge．‘We're passing my office．Let me see how I shall look in the future！’
　　The spirit stopped．Its hand was pointing away from the office．But Scrooge hurried up to the window and looked in．It was an office still， but not his．The furniture was not the same，and the figure in the chair was not himself．The ghost continued to point onwards，and Scrooge followed．They reached a church， and entered the churchyard．Here， among the untidy graves and the uncut grass，lay the miserable man whose name Scrooge would soon learn．It was a lonely place， most suitable for a man so unloved．
　　The spirit stood and pointed down at one of the graves．
　　Scrooge was strangely afraid．
　　‘Before I look more closely at that gravestone，’he said， ‘answer me one question．Are these the shadows of the things that will be，or are they only shadows of the things that may be？’
　　Without replying， the ghost pointed silently down at the grave．Scrooge moved slowly towards it，and following the finger，read on the stone his own name， EBENEZER SCROOGE．
　　‘Am I that man who was lying on the bed？’he cried．
　　The spirit pointed from the grave to him，and back again．
　　‘No，spirit！ Oh， no，no！’
　　The finger was still there．
　　Scrooge fell to the ground in front of the ghost，holding its long dark robe．‘Spirit！Listen！I am a changed man ！I have learnt my lesson from you spirits！Why show me this terrible end，if there is no hope for me！’
　　For the first time the hand appeared to shake．
　　‘Good spirit，tell me that my future will change，if I change my life now！’
　　The kind hand shook again．
　　‘I will remember the past，and think of the future．I will be good to other people．I will keep Christmas in my heart，and will try to be kind，ad cheerful，and merry，every day．Oh，tell me I can clean away the writing on this stone！’
　　Wildly，he caught the ghostly hand and held it for a moment．But the spirit was stronger than him， and pulled its hand away．Just then Scrooge noticed that something strange was happening to the spirit．It was getting smaller and smaller， and suddenly it became—a bedpost．






■ 5 The end of the story
　　Yes！and the bedpost was his own．The bed was his own，the room was his own．Best and happiest of all， the future was his own， to change his life in！
　　‘I will remember the past，and think of the future，’repeated Scrooge，as he jumped out of bed．‘God bless you，Jacob Marley！And God bless Christmas！’
　　In his excitement he found it difficult to speak．His face was still wet from crying．‘Here are my bed－curtains！’he cried delightedly．‘They aren't stolen！ And I'm alive！Those were only shadows of things that may be！The future will be different！I know it will！’
　　All this time his hands were busy，hurriedly putting on his clothes．He put his left foot in his right shoe，couldn't find the buttons on his shirt，and forgot to brush his hair．
　　‘I don't know what I'm doing！’said Scrooge， laughing and crying at the same time．‘A merry Christmas to everybody！A happy new year to all the world！Hurrah！ There's the door which Jacob's ghost came through！There's the corner where the ghost of Christmas Present sat！There's the window where I saw the travelling ghosts！It's all true，it all happened！Ha ha ha！’
　　Really，for a man who hadn't laughed for so many years，it was an excellent laugh．The father of a long line of excellent laughs！
　　‘I don't know what day of the month it is！’said Scrooge．‘I don't know how long I've been with the spirits！I don't know anything．I'm just like a baby．Never mind！I prefer being a baby！Hurrah！’
　　Just then he heard the church bells ring out louder than he had ever heard before．Running to the window， he opened it and looked out．No fog at all， a clear， bright， cold day， golden sunlight， blue sky，sweet clean air，merry bells．Oh， wonderful！wonderful！
　　‘What's today？’he cried，calling down to a boy in the street．
　　‘Today？’replied the boy，in great surprise．‘Why，it's Christmas Day！’
　　‘So I haven't missed it！’thought Scrooge．‘The spirits have done it all in one night！’He called down to the boy again，‘Hallo， young man！Do you know the meat shop at the corner of the next street？ ’
　　‘Of course I do，’replied the boy．
　　‘What an intelligent boy！’said Scrooge．‘Do you know if they've sold the big turkey that was in the shop window yesterday？’
　　‘What，the one as big as me？’asked the boy．
　　‘What a delightful boy！’said Scrooge．‘It's wonderful talking to him．Yes， that's the one！’
　　‘It's still there in the window，’said the boy．
　　‘Is it？’said Scrooge．‘Well， go and buy it．’
　　‘You don't mean it！’cried the by．
　　‘I do，I do．I'm serious．Go and buy it，and tell the man to bring it back here．Come back with the man and I'll give you a shilling．Come back in less than five minutes and I'll give you three shillings！’
　　The by went off like a bullet from a gun．
　　‘I'll send the turkey to Bob Cratchit's！ laughed Scrooge．‘He'll never know who's sent it！It's twice as big as Tiny Tim！Ha ha ha！’
　　He went on laughing as he wrote Bob's address，gave it to the man with the turkey，and paid for a taxi，because the turkey was much too heavy to carry all the way to Camden Town．
　　Now he finished dressing，and went out into the streets， wearing his best clothes．The town was full of happy， busy people，and Scrooge smiled at all of them．Three or four men said cheerfully to him， ‘Good morning，sir！ And a merry Christmas to you！’scrooge thought these were the best sounds that he had ever heard．
　　As he was walking， he suddenly noticed one of the comfortable-looking gentlemen who had come to his office to ask for money for the poor．Scrooge went straight up to him， took the old gentleman by both hands，and said，‘My dear sir，how are you？ A merry Christmas to you， sir！’
　　‘Mr Scrooge？’asked the gentleman，surprised．
　　‘Yes， that's my name．I'm very sorry for what I said to you when you visited me yesterday．Will you please—’and he spoke very quietly in the gentleman's ear．
　　‘Good Heavens！’cried the gentleman．‘My dear Mr Scrooge，are you serious？’
　　‘I am．Not a shilling less．I must tell you，I haven't given anything to anyone for years．’
　　‘My dear sir！’said the gentleman，shaking hands with him．‘I don't know how to thank you for—’
　　Don't say anything，please，’replied Scrooge．‘Will you come and see me tomorrow about it？’
　　‘I will！’cried the old gentleman happily．
　　‘Thank you，and God bless you！’said Scrooge．
　　He went to church， and watched the people，and gave children money for sweets， and discovered that he had never been so happy in his life．In the afternoon he went to his nephew's house He passed the door several times before he was brave enough to knock．But at last he did it，and was taken into the sitting-room，where Fred and his pretty wife were waiting for their friends to arrive for dinner．
　　‘Fred！’said Scrooge．‘It's your uncle Scrooge．I've come to dinner．Will you let me stay， Fred？’
　　Let him stay！Fred almost shook his uncle's arm off．Scrooge felt at home in five minutes．Nothing could be merrier．And what a wonderful dinner they had！Wonderful party，wonderful games，wonderful happiness！
　　But he was early at the office next morning．Oh，he was there early．He wanted to catch Bob Cratchit arriving late．And he did！The clock struck nine．No Bob．A quarter past．No Bob．He was eighteen and a half minutes late when he finally hurried in．Scrooge was sitting with his office door open．
　　‘Hallo！’said Scrooge in his old，hard voice．‘What do you mean by coming here so late？’
　　I'm very sorry，sir， said Bob．‘I am late．It's only once a year．We were rather merry yesterday，sir．’
　　‘Now I'll tell you what，my friend，said Scrooge，‘I'm not going to have this any longer．And so’，he continued， jumping off his chair and shaking Bob's hand，‘I'm going to pay you twice as much！’
　　Bob's face went white．For a second or two he thought that Scrooge had gone crazy．
　　‘A merry Christmas，Bob！’said Scrooge，and it was clear that he meant It．‘A merrier Christmas，Bob，than I've given you for a long time．I'm going to pay you well，and help you with your family，and we'll discuss it all this afternoon over a Christmas drink， Bob！ Put more wood on the fire at once， Bob Cratchit，and let's be comfortable！’
　　Scrooge did everything that he had promised，and more．To Tiny Tim， who did NOT die，he became a second father．He became as good a friend，employer and man， as anyone in London or in the world．Some people laughed to see the change in him，but he did not care．His own heart laughed inside him，and that was good enough for him．He never had any more conversations with spirits， but kept Christmas cheerfully，and lived a happy life．That is what all of us want， and so，as Tiny Tim said，‘God bless us， every one！’




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The PictureofDorianGrayby Oscar Wilde





■ The Artist



■ 1
　　Through the open windows of the room came the rich scent of summer flowers．Lord Henry Wotton lay back in his chair and smoked his cigarette．Beyond the soft sounds of the garden he could just hear the noise of London．
　　In the centre of the room there was a portrait of a very beautiful young man，and in front of it stood the artist himself，Basil Hallward．
　　'It's your best work，Basil，the best portrait that you've ever painted，' said Lord Henry lazily．'You must send it to the best art gallery in London．'
　　'No，'Basil said slowly．'No，I won't send it anywhere．'
　　Lord Henry was surprised．'But my dear Basil，why not？'he asked．'What strange people you artists are！You want to be famous，but then you're not happy when you are famous．It's bad when people talk about you—but it's much worse when they don't talk about you．'
　　'I know you'll laugh at me，'replied Basil，'but I can't exhibit the picture in an art gallery．I've put too much of myself into it．'
　　Lord Henry laughed．'Too much of yourself into it！You don't look like him at all．He has a fair and beautiful face．And you—well，you look intelligent，of course，but with your strong face and black hair，you are not beautiful．'
　　'You don't understand me，Harry，'replied Basil．（Lord Henry's friends always called him Harry．）'Of course I'm not like him，'Basil continued．'In fact，I prefer not to be beautiful．Dorian Gray's beautiful face will perhaps bring him danger and trouble．'
　　'Dorian Gray？Is that his name？'asked Lord Henry．
　　'Yes．But I didn't want to tell you．'
　　'Why not？'
　　'Oh，I can't explain，'said Basil．'When I like people a lot，I never tell their names to my other friends．I love secrets，that's all．'
　　'Of course，'agreed his friend．'Life is much more exciting when you have secrets．For example，I never know where my wife is，and my wife never knows what I'm doing．When we meet—and we do meet sometimes—we tell each other crazy stories，and we pretend that they're true．'
　　'You pretend all the time，Harry，'said Basil．'I think that you're probably a very good husband，but you like to hide your true feelings．'
　　'Oh，don't be so serious，Basil，'smiled Lord Henry．'Let's go into the garden．'






■ 1



■ 2
　　In the garden the leaves shone in the sunlight，and the flowers moved gently in the summer wind．The two young men sat on a long seat under the shadow of a tall tree．
　　'Before I go，'said Lord Henry，'you must answer my question，Basil．Why won't you exhibit Dorian Gray's portrait in an art gallery？'He looked at his friend and smiled．
　　'Please give me the real reason，now．Not the answer that you gave me before．'
　　'Harry，when an artist feels strongly about a portrait，it becomes a portrait of himself，not of the sitter．The artist paints the face and body of the sitter，but in fact he shows his own feelings．The reason why I won't exhibit this portrait is because I'm afraid it shows the secret of my heart．'
　　Lord Henry laughed．'And what is this secret of your heart？'
　　His friend was silent．Lord Henry picked a flower and looked at it with interest．
　　'Two months ago，'Basil said at last，'I was at a party at Lady Brandon's house．I was talking to friends when I realized that someone was watching me．I turned and saw Dorian Gray for the first time．We looked at each other，and I felt a sudden，very strong fear．I felt that this person could change my life…could bring me happiness—and unhappiness．Later，Lady Brandon introduced us．We laughed at something that she said，and became friends at once．'
　　He stopped Lord Henry smiled．'Tell me more，'he said．'How often do you see him？'
　　'Every day，'answered Basil．'I'm not happy if I don't see him every day—he's necessary to my life．'
　　'But I thought you only cared about your art，'said Lord Henry．
　　'He is all my art now，'replied Basil，seriously．'Since I met Dorian Gray，the work that I've done is good，the best work of my life．Because of him I see art in a different way，a new way．When I'm with him，I paint wonderful pictures．'
　　'Basil，this is extraordinary．I must meet Dorian Gray，'said Lord Henry．
　　Basil got up and walked up and down the garden．'So that's my secret Dorian doesn't know about my feelings．And I can't let people see the portrait，because it shows what's in my heart．There's too much of myself in it，Harry，too much！'
　　Lord Henry looked at Basil's face before he spoke．'Tell me，does Dorian Gray care about you？'
　　The artist thought for a few moments．'He likes me，'he said at last．'I know he likes me．Usually he's very friendly to me，but sometimes he seems to enjoy hurting me．He says unkind things that give me pain，Harry．And then I feel that I've given myself to somebody who thinks my heart is a pretty flower．A flower that he can enjoy for a summer's day，and can forget tomorrow．'
　　'Summer days，Basil，'said Lord Henry witn a smile，'can sometimes be too long．Perhaps you'll become tired sooner than he will．'
　　'Harry，don't talk like that．While I live，Dorian Gray will be important to me．You change your feelings too quickly．You can't feel what I feel．'
　　'My dear Basil，how unkind you are！'Lord Henry was amused．How interesting other people's lives were，he thought．Slowly he pulled a flower to pieces with his long fingers．'I remember now，'he continued．'I think my aunt knows Dorian Gray．I'd like to meet him very much．'
　　'But I don't want you to meet him，'said Basil．
　　A servant came across the garden towards them．
　　'Mr Dorian Gray has arrived，sir，'he said to Basil．
　　'You have to introduce me now，'laughed Lord Henry．
　　Basil turned to him．'Dorian Gray is my dearest fried，'he said quietly．'He's a good person and he's young—only twenty．Don't change him．Don't try to influence him．Your clever words are very amusing，of course，but you laugh at serious things．Don't take him away from me．He's necessary to my life as an artist．'
　　Lord Henry smiled．'You worry too much，my friend，'he said，and together they walked back into the house．



■ 2



■ The Friend



■ 3
　　As they entered the house，they saw Dorian Gray．He was sitting by the window and turning some pages of music．
　　'You must lend me this music，Basil，'he said．Then he turned and saw Lord Henry．'Oh，I'm sorry，Basil．I didn't realize…'
　　'Dorian，this is Lord Henry Wotton，'said Basil．'He's an old friend of mine．'
　　Dorian Gray shook hands with Lord Henry，and while they talked，Lord Henry studied the young man．Yes，he was very good－looking indeed，with his bright blue eyes and his gold hair．He had an open，honest face．There were no dark secrets in that face．Lord Henry could understand Basil's feelings for him．
　　Basil was getting his paints ready．Now he looked at Lord Henry．'Harry，'he said，'I want to finish this portrait of Dorian today．I'm afraid I must ask you to go away．'
　　Lord Henry smiled and looked at Dorian Gray．'Should I go，Mr Gray？'he asked．
　　'Oh，please don't leave，Lord Henry．Basil never talks when he's painting，and it's so boring．Please stay．I'd like you to talk to me．'
　　'Well，Basil？'Lord Henry asked．
　　The artist bit his lip．'Very well，Harry．Stay…if you must．
　　While Basil painted，Lord Henry talked，and the young man listened．The words filled Dorian's head like music—wild，exciting music．What a beautiful voice Lord Henry has，he thought．They are only words，but how terrible they are！How bright and dangerous！You cannot escape from words．Dorian began to understand things about himself that he had never understood before．Why had he never seen himself so clearly，he wondered？
　　Lord Henry watched Dorian，and smiled．He knew when to speak，and when to be silent．He felt very interested in this young man，with his wonderful face．
　　Later they walked in the garden together，while Basil worked at the portrait．The rich scent of the flowers was all around them．Dorian looked at the older man，and wondered about him．He was tall，with a thin dark face and cool white hands．Dorian liked him，but why did he feel a little afraid of him？
　　'You must come out of the sun，Mr Gray，'said Lord Henry．'A brown skin isn't fashionable and it won't suit you．
　　'Oh，it doesn't matter，'laughed Dorian．
　　'But it should matter to you，Mr Gray．'
　　'Why？'asked Dorian．
　　'Because you're young，and being young is wonderful．Ah，you smile．You don't think so now，but one day you'll understand what I mean—when you're old，and tired，and no longer beautiful．You have a wonderfully beautiful face，Mr Gray．It's true．Don't shake your head at me．And there's nothing more important，more valuable than beauty．When your youth goes，your beauty will go with it．Then you'll suddenly discover that your life is empty—there will be nothing to enjoy，nothing to hope for．Time is your enemy，Mr Gray．It will steal everything from you．People are afraid of themselves today．Afraid to live．But you，with your face and your youth，there's nothing that you cannot do．You must live！Live the wonderful life that is in you！We can never be young again．Youth！Ah，there is nothing in the world as important as youth！'
　　Dorian Gray listened and wondered．New ideas filled his head．He felt strange，different．
　　At that moment Basil called them from the house．Lord Henry turned to Dorian．'You're happy that you've met me，Mr Gray，'he said．
　　'Yes，I'm happy now．Will I always be happy，I wonder？'
　　'Always！'Lord Henry smiled．'What a terrible word！Women use it much too often．What does it mean？It's today that is important．'






■ 3



■ 4
　　In the house Basil Hallward stood in front of the portrait of Dorian Gray．'It's finished，'he said．He wrote his name in the corner of the picture．
　　Lord Henry studied the picture carefully．'Yes，'he said．It's your best work．It's excellent．Mr Gray，come and look at yourself．'
　　Dorian looked at the picture for a long time．He smiled as he saw the beautiful face in front of him，and for a moment he felt happy．But then he remembered Lord Henry's words．'How long，'he thought，'will I look like the picture？Time will steal my beauty from me．I will grow old，but the picture will always be young．'And his heart grew cold with fear．
　　'Don't you like it，Dorian？'asked Basil at last．
　　'Of course he likes it，'said Lord Henry．'It's a very fine work of art．I'd like to buy it myself．'
　　'It's not mine to sell，Harry．The picture is Dorian's．'
　　'I wish，'cried Dorian suddenly，'I wish that I could always stay young and that the picture could grow old．'
　　Lord Henry laughed．'I don't think you would like that，Basil，would you？'
　　'No，I wouldn't like it at all，'agreed Basil with a smile．
　　Dorian turned，his face red and angry．'Yes，you like your art better than your friends，'he said to Basil．'How long will you like me？Only while I'm beautiful，I suppose．Lord Henry is right．Youth is the most important thing in the world．Oh，why did you paint this picture？Why should it stay young while I grow old？I wish the picture could change，and I could stay as I am．I would give anything，yes，anything，for that．'He hid his face in his hands．
　　'Dorian，Dorian！'said Basil unhappily．'Don't talk like that．You're my dearest friend．'He turned to Lord Henry．'What have you been teaching him？'he asked angrily．'Why didn't you go away when I asked you？'
　　Lord Henry smiled．'It's the real Dorian Gray—that's all．'
　　Basil turned and walked quickly over to the portrait．'It's my best work，but now I hate it．I will destroy it now，before it destroys our friendship．'He picked up a long knife．
　　But Dorian was there before him．'No，Basil，don't！You can't destroy it．That would be murder！'
　　'So，'said Basil coldly，'you've decided that you like the portrait after all．'
　　'Like it？'said Dorian．'I'm in love with it．I cannot live without it．'
　　Later，during tea，Lord Henry invited Basil and Dorian to go with him to the theatre that night．Basil refused，but Dorian was happy to accept．
　　'Stay and have dinner with me，Dorian，'said Basil，but no，Dorian preferred to go to the theatre with Lord Henry．
　　As the door closed behind Dorian and Lord Henry，Basil turned back to the picture．'I shall stay here with the real Dorian Gray，'he said sadly to himself．



■ 4



■ 5
　　The next morning Lord Henry went to visit his aunt，Lady Agatha．She was surprised to see him．
　　'I thought you fashionable young men never got up until the afternoon，'she said．
　　'Ah，but my dear aunt，I need some information，you see，'replied Lord Henry．'I met Dorian Gray yesterday，and I'd like to know more about him．'
　　'Oh，he's Lord Kelso's grandson，'said Lady Agatha．'His mother was Lady Margaret Devereux，a very beautiful woman．She ran away from home to marry a poor soldier．He was killed a few months later and she died soon after her son was born．She was a lovely woman．Dorian Gray has her beauty and he will，I understand，have his grandfather's money．'
　　'He is，'agreed Lord Henry，'extraordinarily good－looking．'
　　'Come to lunch，'invited his aunt．'Dorian Gray will be here and you can meet him again．'
　　'I'd love to come，'smiled Lord Henry．
　　As he left，Lord Henry thought about this sad story．He became more interested than ever in this beautiful young man，Dorian Gray．He remembered the night before，when Dorian had watched him with his bright blue eyes，half wondering，half afrald．'He does not yet know himself，'thought Lord Henry，with a smile．'But I can teach him．Yes，I can influence him in any way that I please．I will teach him to discover the fire of youth，and love，and life．'
　　The conversation among the fashionable people at Lady Agatha's lunch was quick and clever．Lord Henry talked，in his lazy，amusing way，and knew that Dorian Gray was watching and listening．
　　After a while the conversation turned to a friend's plans to marry an American girl．
　　'Why can't these American women stay in their own country？They're always telling us that it's a paradise for women，'said Lord Burdon．
　　'It is，'said Lord Henry．'That's the reason why they're so happy to escape from it．'
　　'They say，'laughed the man next to Lady Agatha，'that when good Americans die，they go to Paris．'
　　'Really！And where do bad Americans go to when they die？'asked Lady Agatha．
　　'They go to America，'said Lord Henry．
　　People smiled，and the conversation moved on to other things．Lord Henry took ideas and played with them；he gave them wings，and they flew like brightly coloured birds around the room．People laughed，and smiled，and told him that he should be more serious．But Dorian Gray never took his eyes away from Lord Henry．
　　After lunch Lord Henry said that he was going to the park and as he left the room，Dorian Gray touched his arm．'May I come with you？'he asked．
　　'But I thought you'd promised to go and see Basil Hallward，'Lord Henry replied．
　　'Yes，but I'd prefer to come with you．Please let me，'said Dorian．'I want to listen to you talking．Nobody speaks as well as you do． '
　　'Ah！I've talked enough for today．'Lord Henry smiled．'But you may come with me if you want to．'



■ 5



■ The Young Man In Love



■ 6
　　One afternoon，a month later，Dorian Gray visited Lord Henry．Dorian was excited and his eyes were shining．
　　'Harry，'he began，'I'm discovering life．I'm doing everything that you told me to do．I'm in love！'
　　'Who are you in love with？'asked Lord Henry，calmly．
　　'With an actress．'
　　'Oh，everybody's in love with an actress at some time in their lives，'said Lord Henry．
　　'No，Harry，this is different．She's wonderful！Her name's Sybil Vane，and one day she'll be a very famous actress．She really is extraordinarily clever．'
　　'My dear boy，'said Lord Henry in his lazy voice，'no woman is extraordinarily clever．Women have nothing to say，but they say it beautifully．There are only five women in London who can give you real conversation．But tell me about your wonderful actress．How long have you known her？'
　　'Harry！I'll tell you all about her，but you must promise not to laugh．'
　　Lord Henry listened and smiled．Dorian had discovered an old，dirty theatre in a poor street in London．He had gone in to look for adventure，but had found love，he told Lord Henry．The play had been Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet．
　　'Romeo was a fat old man with a terrible voice，but Juliet！Oh，Harry，she was about seventeen，with dark brown hair and a face like a flower．She was the loveliest girl that I'd ever seen in my life，and her voice was like music．I love her，Harry．She's everything to me．Every night I go to see her in different plays and she's always wonderful．'
　　'That's the reason，I suppose，why you never have dinner with me now，'said Lord Henry．
　　'But Harry，you and I see each other every day—we always have lunch together，'said Dorian in surprise．'I have to go and see Sybil in the theatre every night．You and Basil must come with me to see her．Then you can see yourself how wonderful she is．Come tomorrow．'
　　'Very well，my dear Dorian，we'll come and watch your Juliet．But you'll be in love many times，you know—this is only the beginning．'
　　After Dorian had gone，Lord Henry smiled to himself．How amusing it was to watch this young man，he thought．He was very different now from the frightened boy in Basil Hallward's house．He had opened like a flower in the sun，and was learning to enjoy every pleasure in life．'And it is I，'thought Lord Henry，'who have taught him how to do this．'
　　When Lord Henry returned home that night，there was a letter for him lying on the table．It told him that Dorian Gray was going to marry Sybil Vane．






■ 6



■ 7
　　'Mother，Mother，I'm so happy，'cried the girl，'and you must be happy too． '
　　Mrs Vane put her thin white hands on her daughter's head．'I'm only happy when I see you in the theatre，'she said．'And we are poor．We need the money—don't forget that．what do we know about this young man？You don't know his real name，or anything about him．'
　　'No，but I call him Prince Charming．He's everything to me．I love him and he loves me．Oh Mother，let me be happy！ '
　　'You're too young to think of love，'said her mother．She looked at her daughter's lovely face， and tried to warn her of the dangers of love，but the girl did not listen．She was locked in her prison of love．
　　At that moment the girl's brother entered the room．He was a heavy，dark young man，not at all like his sister．
　　'I've heard about a gentleman who visits you every night at the theatre，'he said to his sister．'Who is he？What does he want？'
　　'Oh James，don't be angry with me today，'cried Sybil．'You're leaving for Australia tomorrow，and today is your last day．Come for a walk with me in the park．I'll go and get ready．'She danced out of the room，and her mother and brother could hear her singing as she ran upstairs．
　　James Vane turned to his mother．'My new life as a sailor will keep me away from England for many years，'he said．'But I don't like to leave Sybil alone．'
　　'Sybil has me，her mother，you know，'said Mrs Vane quietly．
　　'Then take care of her．'James Vane gave his mother a long，hard look．'If that man hurts my sister，I'll find him，and kill him like a dog．'



■ 7



■ 8
　　As they waited for Dorian Gray the next night，Lord Henry and Basil Hallward discussed Sybil Vane．Basil had not been happy at the news of Dorian's marriage plans．
　　'An actress！'he had cried．'But Dorian is a gentleman，the grandson of Lord Kelso．He can't marry an actress．'
　　'Why not？'Lord Henry had said coolly．'He'll love her wildly for six months，and then suddenly he'll be in love with another woman．It will be very amusing to watch．'
　　But when Dorian arrived and told the story of his love，Basil became a little happier．'You're right，'he told Dorian．'The woman that you love must be wonderful．I can see already that she's changed you．'
　　'Yes，'said Dorian happily，'yes，Sybil has changed me．From this moment I shall be good．I'll never listen again，Harry，to your dangerous ideas about life and pleasure．'
　　Lord Henry smiled．'Ah，'he said，'when we are happy，we are always good，but when we are good，we are not always happy．'
　　Basil Hallward shook his head at this，but Dorian laughed．'You cut life to pieces with your clever words，Harry．'
　　The theatre was crowded and noisy，but when Sybil Vane appeared，everyone became silent．She was one of the most beautiful girds that Lord Henry had ever seen．'Lovely！Lovely！'he said softly．
　　But although Sybil looked beautiful，her voice sounded unnatural．She spoke Juliet's words，but there was no feeling in them．Her voice was lovely，but it took away all the life from the words People in the theatre began talking loudly，and after half an hour Lord Henry stood up and put on his coat．
　　'She's very beautiful，Dorian，but she's not an actress，'he said．'Let's go．'
　　'I think that Miss Vane must be ill，'added Basil．'We'll come another night．'
　　Dorian did not look at them．'Go away．I want to be alone，'he said miserably，and as his friends left， he covered his face with his hands．
　　When the play came to its painful end，Dorian went to see Sybil．
　　'I wasn't a very good Juliet tonight，'she said，and looked at him with love in her eyes．
　　'You were terrible，'said Dorian coldly．'My friends were bored．I was bored．I suppose you were ill．'
　　She did not seem to hear him．'Dorian，'she cried，'before I knew you，the theatre was my only life．I thought that it was all true．I knew nothing but shadows，and I thought that they were real．But you've taught me the difference between art and life．How can I pretend to be Juliet—to feel Juliet's love，when I know now what true love is？'
　　Dorian turned his face away from her．'But I loved you for your art—because you were a wonderful actress，'he said．His voice was hard You have killed my love．Without your art，you are nothing．I never want to see you again．'
　　Sybil's face was white with fear．'You're not serious，are you，Dorian？'she asked．She touched his arm with her small，gentle hand．
　　'Don't touch me！'he shouted angrily．He pushed her away，and she fell to the floor and lay there like a broken bird．
　　'Dorian，please don't leave me，'she cried．'I love you better than anything in the world．Don't leave me！'
　　Dorian Gray looked down at her with his beautiful eyes．There was no love or gentleness in his face．'I'm going，'he said at last．'I don't wish to be unkind，but I don't want to see you again．'Without another word he left her．
　　All night he walked through the streets of London．When morning came，he went home．When he entered his house，he saw the portrait of himself that Basil Hallward had painted．There was something different about it，he thought．The face had changed—there was something unkind，and cruel about the mouth．It was very strange．
　　He picked up a mirror and looked at his own face，and then looked again at the face in the portrait．Yes，it was different．What did this change mean？
　　Suddenly he remembered his wish in Basil Hallward's house…his wish that he could stay young，but the picture could grow old．The idea was impossible，of course．But why did the face in the picture have that cruel，unkind mouth？
　　Cruel！Had he been cruel to Sybil Vane？He remembered her white，unhappy face as she lay at his feet．But she had hurt him，too．No，Sybil Vane was nothing to him now．
　　But the picture watched him，with its beautiful face and its cruel smile．It had taught him to love his own beauty．Would it also teach him to hate his own heart，his own soul？No，he would go back to Sybil Vane．He would marry her，try to love her again．Poor child！How cruel he had been to her！They would be happy together．
　　He covered the picture and quickly left the room．



■ 8



■ The Death Of Love



■ 9
　　It was long past midday when Dorian woke up．His servant brought him tea and his letters，but he did not read them．Yesterday seemed like a bad dream，but when he went downstairs，he saw the covered picture．Should he uncover it，he wondered？Had the face in the picture really changed？Did he want to know？He lit a cigarette and thought for a while．Yes，he had to know．He lifted the cover．
　　There was no mistake．The portrait had really changed．He could not explain it，could not understand it．It was impossible，but it had happened．
　　Dorian felt sick and ashamed．He did not know what to do，or what to think．Finally，he sat down and wrote a long letter to Sybil Vane．He covered page after page with wild words of love．Then，suddenly，he heard Lord Henry's voice at the door．Dorian jumped up and covered the picture．
　　'My dear boy，'said Lord Henry，as he came in．'I'm so sorry．But you must not think too much about her．'
　　'Do you mean about Sybil Vane？'asked Dorian．'There's nothing to be sorry about．I want to be good，and I'm going to be happy．I shall marry Sybil Vane．I'm not going to break my promise to her．'
　　'Marry Sybil Vane！'Lord Henry stared at Dorian．'Didn't you get my letter？'
　　'I haven't read my letters today，'said Dorian slowly．
　　Lord Henry walked across the room and took Dorian's hands in his own．'Dorian，'he said quietly，'don't be frightened—my letter told you that Sybil Vane is dead．She killed herself at the theatre last night．'
　　'No，no，that's impossible！'cried Dorian．He pulled his hands away and stared at Lord Henry with wild eyes．'This is terrible，Harry．I have murdered Sybil Vane！'
　　'She killed herself，'said Lord Henry calmly．'You didn' t murder her．She killed herself because she loved you．It's very sad，of course，but you mustn't think too much about it．You must come and have dinner with me．'
　　'Harry，listen．Last night I told her that I didn't want to see her again．But after I left her，I realized how cruel I had been．I decided to go back to her，to marry her．And now she is dead！Harry，what shall I do？You don't know the danger that I am in．'
　　'My dear Dorian，said Lord Henry．'Marriage with Sybil Vane was not for you．No，no…marriages like that are never successful．The man quickly becomes unhappy and bored．Of course，he's kind to his wife．We can always be kind to people that we're not interested in．But the woman soon discovers that her husband is bored．And then she either becomes terribly unfashionable，or wears very expensive hats that another woman's husband has to pay for．'
　　The young man walked up and down me room．'I suppose that's true，'he said unhappily．'But Harry，I don't think that I'm cruel．Do you？'
　　Lord Henry smiled．He told Dorian Gray what he wanted to hear．And then he told him clever，amusing stories about the women that he himself had loved．He said that Sybil Vane's death was a beautiful end to a love story for an actress．'The girl never really lived，'he continued，'so she never really died．Don't cry for Sybil Vane．She was less real than Juliet．'
　　After a while Dorian Gray looked up．'You have explained me to myself，Harry，'he said slowly．'How well you know me！But we won't talk of this again．It's been a wonderful lesson for me．That's all．'
　　When Lord Henry had left，Dorian uncovered the picture again．He had to choose between a good life and a bad life，he thought．But then he realized that，in fact，he had already chosen．He would stay young for ever，and enjoy every wild pleasure that life could give him．The face in the picture would grow old and ugly and unkind，but he would stay beautiful for ever．He covered the picture again，and smiled．
　　An hour later he was at Lord Henry's house，and Lord Henry was smiling at his side．






■ 9



■ 10
　　While Dorian was having breakfast the next morning，Basil Hallward came to see him．
　　'At last I've found you，Dorian，'he said seriously．'I came last night， but they told me that you'd gone out to dinner with friends．I knew that wasn't true，of course．I wanted to tell you how sorry I was about Sybil Vane．Poor girl！'
　　'My dear Basil，'said Dorian．He looked bored．'I was at Lord Henry's house last night．It was a very amusing evening．'
　　Basil stared at him．'You went out to dinner？'he said slowly．'You went out to dinner when Sybil Vane was lying dead in some dirty theatre？'
　　'Stop，Basil！I won't listen to you！'Dorian jumped to his feet．'Sybil Vane is in the past… finished… forgotten．'
　　'You've changed，Dorian，'said Basil．'You have the same wonderful face， but where is the kind and gentle boy who sat for my portrait？ Have you no heart？'
　　'Yesterday my heart was full of sadness．I have cried for Sybil，yes，but I cannot cry today．I have changed， Basil．I'm a man now，with new feelings，new ideas． Don't be angry with me．I am what I am．There's nothing more to say．'
　　Basil watched him sadly．'Well， Dorian，'he said at last，'I won't speak of poor Sybil again．But will you come and sit for another portrait soon？'
　　'No．Never，'said Dorian quickly．'It's impossible．'
　　'But why？'asked Basil，very surprised．'And why have you covered the portrait？'He walked across the room towards the painting．
　　Dorian cried out in fear， and ran between Basil and the portrait．'No，Basil！You must not look at it．I don't want you to see it．'His face was white and angry．'If you try to look at it，I'll never speak to you again．'
　　The artist stared at him．'Why can't I look at my own work？'he asked．'I'm going to exhibit it in an art gallery in Paris soon．'
　　Dorian tried to hide his fear．'But you said…you told me that you would never exhibit the picture． Why have you changed your mind？'He came closer to Basil and looked into his face．'Tell me why，'he said．
　　Basil turned away． After a while he said slowly，'I see that you too have noticed something strange about the picture．Dorian， you changed my life as an artist from the moment when I met you．You became very important to me—I could not stop thinking about you．And when I painted this portrait，I felt that I'd put too much of myself into it． I could not let other people see it．'He was silent for a moment， then turned back to Dorian．'Perhaps you're right．I cannot exhibit this picture．But will you let me look at it again？'
　　'No，never！'
　　The artist smiled sadly．'Well，I've told you my secret now．Try to understand me，Dorian．You've been the one person in my life who has really influenced my art．'
　　As he left the room，Dorian Gray smiled to himself．What a dangerous moment that had been！ Poor Basil！Although he had told his own secret， he had not discovered Dorian's secret．But the picture…he must hide it away at once．No one must ever see it again．
　　He had the covered portrait carried upstairs to a small room at the top of the house． Then he locked the door and kept the key himself． He felt safe now， because only his eyes would see the terrible changes in that beautiful face．
　　When he returned to the room downstairs，he picked up a book that Lord Henry had lent him． He sat down and began to read．
　　It was the story of a Frenchman， who had spent his life searching for beauty and pleasure—pleasure of all kinds，both good and bad． Dorian read for hours．It was a frightening book，full of strange ideas and dangerous dreams—dreams that slowly became real for Dorian．
　　Dorian read this book many times．In fact， he could not stop reading it，and over the years，it became more and more interesting to him．He felt that the Frenchman's life was a mirror of his own．



■ 10



■ The Thief Of Time



■ 11
　　And so the years passed．
　　But time did not touch the face of Dorian Gray．That wonderful beauty—the beauty that Basil Hallward had painted—never left him．He enjoyed the life of a rich and fashionable young man． He studied art and music， and filled his house with beautiful things from every corner of the world．But his search for pleasure did not stop there． He became hungry for evil pleasures．He became more and more in love with the beauty of his face，more and more interested in the ugliness of his soul．
　　After a while strange stories were heard about him—stories of a secret， more dangerous life． But when people looked at that young and good-looking face， they could not believe the evil stories．And they still came to the famous dinners at his house，where the food，and the music，and the conversation were the best in London．
　　But behind the locked door at the top of the house， the picture of Dorian Gray grew older every year．The terrible face showed the dark secrets of his life．The heavy mouth， the yellow skin，the cruel eyes—these told the real story．Again and again，Dorian Gray went secretly to the room and looked first at the ugly and terrible face in the picture，then at the beautiful young face that laughed back at him from the mirror．
　　After his twenty-fifth year， the stories about him became worse．He was sometimes away from home for several days；he was seen fighting with foreign sailors in bars；he was friendly with thieves．And in the houses of fashionable people，men sometimes turned away when he entered a room．Women's faces sometimes went white when they heard his name．
　　But many people only laughed at these stories．Dorian Gray was still a very rich and fashionable man，and the dinners at his house were excellent．People agreed with Lord Henry，who once said，in his amusing way，that a good dinner was more important than a good life．
　　As the months and years passed， Dorian Gray grew more and more afraid of the picture． He both hated it and loved it，and he became more and more afraid that someone would discover his secret．For weeks he tried not to go near it，but he could not stay away from it for long．Sometimes， when he was staying in friends'houses， he suddenly left and hurried back to London． He wanted to be sure that the room was still locked and the picture was still safe． At one time he used to spend winters with Lord Henry in a little house in Algiers， but now he no longer travelled outside England．
　　His fear grew stronger every year，and as time passed，the face in the picture grew slowly more terrible．






■ 11



■ The Hand Of A Killer



■ 12
　　It was the ninth of November， the evening before his thirty-eighth birthday． Dorian Gray was walking home from Lord Henry's house when he saw Basil Hallward．He felt strangely afraid and tried to pretend that he had not seen him，but Basil hurried after him．
　　'Dorian！'he called．'What extraordinary luck！I'm catching the midnight train to Paris and I wanted to see you before I left．I'll be away from England for six months．'He put his hand on Dorian's arm．'Look，we're near your house．May I come in for a moment？ I have something to say to you．'
　　'Of course．But won't you miss your train？'asked Dorian lazily，as he walked up the steps to his door．
　　'I have plenty of time．It's only eleven o'clock．'
　　They went in and sat down by the fire．
　　'Now，my dear Dorian，I want to speak to you seriously，'Basil began．'I must tell you that people in London are saying the most terrible things about you．'
　　Dorian lit a cigarette and looked bored．'I don't want to know anything about it．It doesn't interest me．'
　　'But it must interest you，Dorian，'said Basil．'Every gentleman is interested in his good name．Of course，when I look at you， I know that these stories can't be true．A man's face shows if his life is good or bad． But why does Lord Berwick leave the room when you enter it？ Why does Lord Staveley say that no honest woman is safe with you？ That young soldier， who was your friend—why did he kill himself？There was Sir Henry Ashton， who had to leave England with a bad name． And what about Lord Kent's son？ What kind of life does he have now？'
　　'Stop，Basil．You don't know what you're talking about，'said Dorian coldly．'Did I teach these people how to live their lives？ And the people who tell these stories—are their lives any better than mine？'
　　'And there are other stories too，'continued Basil．'Are they true？ Can your life really be so bad，so evil？ You were a fine young man once，but now，when I hear these stories，I wonder…Do I know you at all？ What has happened to the real Dorian Gray？ I think I would have to see your soul before I could answer those questions．'
　　'The real Dorian Gray？'asked Dorian quietly， his face white with fear．
　　'Yes，'said the artist sadly．'But only God can see your soul．'
　　A terrible laugh came from the younger man．'Come，Basil，'he cried．'Come with me！I will show you what only God can see． Why not？It's your own work． You've talked enough about evil．Now you must look at it．'
　　He took Basil upstairs to the locked room．Inside，he turned to the artist，with smiling lips and cold， hard eyes．'You're the one man in the world who should know my secret．Are you sure that you want to？'
　　'Yes．'
　　'Then uncover that picture， Basil，and you will see my soul．'
　　A cry of horror came from the artist when he saw the terrible face in the portrait． How could that evil and unlovely face be Dorian Gray's？But yes，it was．He went nearer to the picture．It could not be the portrait that he had painted．But yes， there was his name written in the corner． He turned and looked at Dorian Gray with the eyes of a sick man．
　　'What does this mean？'he asked at last．
　　'When you finished the portrait，'replied Dorian，'I made a wish…'
　　'I remember，yes，'said Basil．'You wished that the picture could become old，and that you could stay young．But this…'He stared again at the picture．'This is impossible．And you told me that you'd destroyed the picture．'
　　'I was wrong．It has destroyed me．'
　　'My God，Dorian！'cried the artist．'If this is true…If this is the face of your soul， then you are more evil than the worst of the stories about you．'He sat down at the table and put his face in his hands．'You must ask God for his help．'
　　'It's too late， Basil．'
　　'It's never too late， Dorian．Look at that terrible face．Look at it！'
　　Dorian turned and stared at the face in the picture， and suddenly he hated Basil more than he had ever hated anyone in his life．Basil now knew his secret， and had seen the real Dorian Gray．Violent feelings burned inside Dorian．He picked up a knife from the table． Then the hate inside him exploded，and like a wild animal， he ran towards Basil，and dug the knife into the artist's neck，again and again and again．The murdered man's head fell forwards， and the blood ran slowly across the table，and down onto the floor．
　　Dorian stood and listened． He could hear nothing—only the drip， drip of blood onto the floor． He went to the window and looked down into the street． He felt strangely calm． The friend who had painted his portrait had gone out of his life．That was all．
　　He locked the door behind him and went quietly downstairs．His servants were all in bed．He sat down and began to think．No one had seen Basil in Dorian's house tonight．Paris．Yes！Basil had gone to Paris， of course， so it would be six months before people asked where he was． Six months！That was more than enough time．
　　Dorian walked up and down the room． Then he took out a book from his desk and began to search for a name． Alan Campbell．Yes，that was the name that he wanted．






■ 12



■ 13
　　The next morning Dorian wrote two letters． He put one of them into his pocket，and he gave the other to his servant．'Take this to Mr Campbell's house at once，'he said．
　　While Dorian waited， he picked up a book and tried to read．But after a time the book fell from his hand． Perhaps Alan Campbell was out of England．Perhaps he would refuse to come．He was a very clever scientist，and five years ago he and Dorian had been good friends． But now Alan never smiled when he met Dorian．
　　Each minute seemed an hour to Dorian，but at last the door opened．Dorian smiled．'Alan！'he said．'Thank you for coming．'
　　'I never wanted to enter your house again，but your letter said that it was a question of life and death，'said Alan Campbell． His voice was hard and cold．
　　'Yes，Alan，it is．Please sit down．'Across the table the two men's eyes met．Dorian was silent for a moment；then，very quietly， he said，'Alan， in a locked room upstairs there is a dead body．I want you to destroy it．There must be nothing left． I know you can do this．'
　　'I don't want to know your terrible secrets．I refuse to help you，'Campbell replied．
　　'But you must， Alan．You're the only person who can help me．'Dorian smiled sadly．He took a piece of paper， wrote something on it，and pushed it across the table to Campbell．
　　As Campbell read the piece of paper， his face went white．He looked at Dorian with hate and fear in his eyes．
　　'I'm so sorry for you，Alan，'said Dorian gently．'I've already written a letter，and if you don't help me，I'll have to send it．But I think that you will help me．'
　　Campbell put his face in his hands， and was silent for a long time．Dorian waited．
　　'I'll need some things from my house，'Campbell said at last．
　　Dorian sent his servant to fetch the things that Campbell needed， and the two men waited silently．When the servant returned， Dorian took the scientist upstairs to the locked room．As they entered， Dorian remembered that the portrait was uncovered．He turned to cover it， then stopped and stared in horror． One of the hands in the picture was red with blood．For Dorian， this was more terrible than the dead body in the room．With shaking hands，he quickly covered the picture．
　　'Leave me now，'ordered Campbell．
　　Five hours later Campbell came back downstairs．'I've done what you asked me to do，'he said．'And now goodbye．I never want to see you again．'
　　When Campbell had left，Dorian went upstairs．There was a terrible smell in the room， but the dead body had gone．



■ 13



■ The Sailor



■ 14
　　Later the same evening Dorian Gray was at a party．He smiled and talked，and looked as young and as good-looking as ever． But his head ached and at dinner he could not eat anything．When Lord Henry asked him if he felt unwell，Dorian said that he was tired and would go home early．
　　At home he felt worse． Although the room was warm， his hands shook with cold． He wanted to forget for a while—to escape from the prison of his real life， and to lose himself in dreams．
　　At midnight， in old dirty clothes， he left the house again and went to the East End of London．There he knew places where he could get opium—dark，evil places where people bought and sold the beautiful， terrible dreams of opium．He had been there many times before．
　　He found the house that he was looking for and went into a long，low room．Men were lying on the dirty floor，a sailor was asleep on a table and two women were drinking at the bar． As Dorian hurried up the narrow stairs，the sweet， heavy smell of opium came to meet him and he smiled in pleasure．But in the room he saw a young man who had once been his friend． He turned away， and went downstairs again to drink at the bar．
　　One of the women spoke to him．
　　'Don't talk to me，'said Dorian angrily， and walked towards the door．
　　'I remember you！You're Prince Charming，aren't you？'she shouted after him．
　　The sleeping sailor woke up when he heard these words，and as Dorian left the house， the sailor hurried after him．
　　Dorian walked quickly along the road，but as he reached a corner，hands closed around his neck． A man pulled him backwards and pushed him against a wall．Dorian fought wildly， and pulled the hands away． Then he saw the gun in the man's hand．
　　'What do you want？'he said quickly．
　　'Keep quiet，'said the man．'If you move，I'll shoot you．'
　　'You're crazy． What have I done to you？'
　　'You destroyed the life of Sybil Vane，'answered the sailor，'and Sybil Vane was my sister．She killed herself because of you．I've been looking for you for years， but I only knew the name that she used to call you—Prince Charming．Well，tonight I heard your name，and tonight you're going to die．'
　　Dorian Gray grew sick with fear．'I never knew her． I've never heard of her．You're crazy，'he cried．Suddenly he had an idea．'How long ago did your sister die？' he asked．
　　'Eighteen years ago，'James Vane replied．'Why do you ask me？'
　　'Eighteen years，'laughed Dorian Gray．'Take me to the light and look at my face．'
　　James Vane stared at Dorian．Then he pushed him towards the light，and in the light he saw the face of a boy of twenty．This man was too young． He was not the man who had destroyed his sister's life．
　　'My God！'he cried．'I nearly murdered you！'
　　'Go home，and put that gun away， before you get into trouble，'said Dorian．And he walked quickly away．
　　James Vane stared after him in horror．Then a woman's hand touched his arm．
　　'Why didn't you kill him？'she asked．'He's evil．'
　　'He's not the man that I'm looking for，'answered the sailor．'The man who I want must be nearly forty now． That man is only a boy．'
　　'A boy？'The woman laughed．Her voice was hard．'It's eighteen years since I met Prince Charming． And his pretty face hasn't changed in all that time．It's true，I promise you．'
　　James Vane ran to the corner of the road， but Dorian Gray had disappeared．






■ 14



■ 15
　　A week later Dorian Gray was at his house in the country，where he had invited Lord Henry and several other friends．Among them was the pretty Lady Monmouth and her much older husband．Lady Monmouth was amusing and clever，and seemed to like Dorian Gray very much． One afternoon，as they laughed and talked together during tea，Dorian went out to fetch a flower for Lady Monmouth's dress．Lord Henry smiled at Lady Monmouth．
　　'I hope you're not in love with Dorian，my dear．He's very dangerous．'
　　She laughed．'Oh，men are much more interesting when they're dangerous．'
　　Just then they heard the sound of a heavy fall．Lord Henry ran out of the room and found Dorian lying unconscious on the floor．When Dorian opened his eyes， Lord Henry said，'My dear Dorian， you must take care of yourself． You're not well．'
　　Dorian stood up slowly．'I'm all right， Harry．I'm all right．'
　　As he dressed for dinner in his room，Dorian remembered what he had seen and cold fear ran through him like a knife．He had seen a face watching him at the window and he had recognized it．It was the face of James Vane．
　　The next day he did not leave the house．In fact， for most of the day he stayed in his room， sick with fear．Every time he closed his eyes， he saw again the sailor's face． He tried to tell himself that he had dreamt it．Yes，it was impossible．Sybil Vane's brother did not know his name，and was probably on his ship at sea． No，of course he had not seen James Vane's face at the window．
　　But the fear stayed with him， dream or no dream．
　　Two days passed and Dorian grew less afraid． On the third day，a clear，bright winter morning，Dorian joined his friends on a shooting-party．With Lady Monmouth by his side， he walked to the edge of the forest where the men were shooting at birds and small animals．The cold air and the sounds and smells of the forest filled Dorian with happiness．Suddenly one of the men shot into the trees near them． There were two cries in the morning air—the cry of an animal and the cry of a man，both in pain．
　　There were shouts and calls from the men， and then a man's body was pulled from the trees． Dorian turned away in horror． Bad luck seemed to follow him everywhere．
　　People began to walk back towards the house． Lord Henry came over to tell Dorian that the man was dead．
　　Dorian shook his head．'Oh， Harry，'he said slowly，'I feel that something terrible is going to happen to some of us—to me，perhaps．'
　　Lord Henry laughed at this idea．'What could happen to you，Dorian？You have everything in the world that a man can want．Forget about this accident． It was just an accident—not murder．'Then he added with a smile，'But it would be very interesting to meet a person who had murdered somebody．'
　　'What a terrible thing to say！'cried Lady Monmouth．'Don't you agree， Mr Gray？ Mr Gray！ Are you ill again？Your face is so white！'
　　Dorian smiled and tried to speak calmly．'It's nothing，'he said quietly．'But please excuse me． I think I must go and lie down．'
　　Upstairs in his room Dorian's body shook with fear like a leaf in the wind． He felt that he could not stay another night in the house．Death walked there in the sunlight．He decided to return immediately to London and to visit his doctor． His servant came to pack his clothes，and while he was doing this，he told Dorian that the dead man was a sailor， but no one knew his name．
　　'A sailor！'cried Dorian．He jumped to his feet．A wild hope filled him．'I must see the body at once．'
　　He hurried to the house where the body lay，and when he uncovered the face of the dead man， he saw that it was James Vane．He cried with happiness，and knew that now he was safe．



■ 15



■ The Picture



■ 16
　　You're going to be good？'said Lord Henry．'Don't tell me that．You're wonderful as you are．Please don't change．'His long， white fingers played with a flower on the table．It was spring in London，and the two friends were having dinner at Lord Henry's house．
　　Dorian Gray shook his head．'No，Harry， I've done too many terrible things in my life， and I'm going to change． I began my good life yesterday， in the country．'
　　'My dear boy，'smiled Lord Henry．'Everybody can be good in the country．There's nothing to do in the country， so it's impossible to do anything bad．But tell me， how did you begin your good life？'
　　'There was a girl in a village． A very beautiful girl， an honest，country girl．She loved me， and was ready to come away with me yesterday， but I said no． I refused to destroy her young life，and I've left her as honest as I found her．'
　　Lord Henry laughed．'You've left here with a broken heart， you mean．How can she be happy now with a country boy，after she has known you？'
　　'Don't，Harry！'cried Dorian．'Can you never be serious？I'm sorry that I told you now．Let's talk about other things．What's been happening in London？'
　　'Oh，people are still discussing poor Basil and how he disappeared．I don't know why， because there are plenty of other things that they can talk about—my wife has run away with another man， Alan Campbell has killed himself…'
　　'What do you think has happened to Basil？'asked Dorian slowly．
　　'I've no idea，'answered Lord Henry．'The English police report that Basil went to Paris on the midnight train on the ninth of November， but the French police say that he never arrived in Paris at all．If Basil wants to hide himself， I really don't care．And if he's dead，I don't want to think about him．Death is the only thing that really frightens me—I hate it．'
　　'Harry，don't people say that… that Basil was murdered？'said Dorian．
　　'Some of the newspapers say so，'replied Lord Henry，'but who would want to murder poor Basil？He wasn't clever enough to have enemies．'
　　'What will you say， Harry， if I tell you that I murdered Basil？'asked Dorian．He watched his friend carefully．
　　Lord Henry smiled．'No，my dear Dorian， murder wouldn't please you．You like a different kind of pleasure．And you should never do anything that you cannot talk about after dinner．'He lifted his coffee cup．'What happened to the fine portrait that Basil painted of you？I haven't seen it for years． Didn't you tell me that it was stolen？What a pity！'
　　'Oh，I never really liked it，'said Dorian．'I prefer not to think about it．'
　　For a while the two men were silent．Then the older man lay back in his chair and looked at Dorian with half-closed eyes．'Tell me how you have kept your youth and your wonderful beauty，Dorian．You must have some secret．I'm only ten years older than you，and I look like an old man．But you haven't changed since the day when I first met you．What a wonderful life you've had！'
　　'Yes，'said Dorian slowly，'it's been wonderful，Harry，but I'm going to change it now． You don't know everything about me．'
　　His friend smiled．'You cannot change to me， Dorian．You and I will always be friends．'
　　Dorian stood up．'I'm tired tonight， Harry． I must go home．I'll see you at lunch tomorrow．Goodnight．'
　　At the door he stopped for a moment and looked back， but then he turned and went out without another word．






■ 16



■ 17
　　At home he thought about his conversation with Lord Henry．Could he really change， he wondered？ He had lived an evil life，and had destroyed other people's lives as well．Was there any hope for him？
　　Why had he ever made that wish about the picture？ He had kept his youth and beauty， but he had paid a terrible price for it．His beauty had destroyed his soul．He picked up a mirror and stared at his face．What was he now？ A face without a heart． Suddenly he hated his own beauty， and dropped the mirror on the floor where it broke into many small pieces．
　　James Vane，Basil Hallward，Sybil Vane—these deaths were not important to him now． It was better not to think of the past． Nothing could change that． He must think of himself．'Perhaps，'he thought，'if I live a better life， the picture will become less ugly．'He remembered the pretty village girl—he had not destroyed her young life．He had done one good thing． Perhaps the picture had already begun to look better．
　　He went quietly upstairs to the locked room． Yes， he would live a good life，and he need not be afraid any more of the evil face of his soul． But when he uncovered the picture， he gave a cry of pain． There was no change． The face in the picture was still terrible—more hateful，if possible， than before—and the red on the hand seemed brighter， like new blood．
　　He stared at the picture with hate and fear in his eyes．Years ago he had loved to watch it changing and growing old；now he could not sleep because of it．It had stolen every chance of peace or happiness from him．He must destroy it．
　　He looked round and saw the knife that had killed Basil Hallward．'Now it will kill the artist's work，'he said to himself．'It will kill the past， and when that is dead， I will be free．'He picked up the knife and dug it into the picture．
　　There was a terrible cry， and a loud crash．The servants woke，and two gentlemen，who were passing in the road below， stopped and looked up at the house． A policeman came by， and they asked him：
　　'Whose house is that？'
　　'Mr Dorian Gray's，sir，'was the answer．
　　The two gentlemen looked at each other， then turned away from the house and walked on．
　　Inside the house the servants talked in low， frightened voices． After some minutes they went up to the room． They knocked， but there was no reply． They called out． Nothing．They could not open the door， so they climbed down from the roof and got in through the window．
　　Against the wall they saw a fine portrait of the young Dorian Gray， in all his wonderful youth and beauty． Lying on the floor was a dead man， with a knife in his heart． His face was old and ugly and yellow with disease．
　　Only the rings on his fingers told them who he was．



■ 17

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Bronte Story by Tim Vicary





■ 1 Haworth
　　There was a cold wind this afternoon，but the sun shone for an hour or two．I walked out on the moors behind the house．The sheep were hiding from the wind under the stone walls，and there were grey clouds over the hills to the west．It is only November，but I could smell snow in the air．
　　It will be a cold winter，this year of 1855．
　　the rector of the village of Haworth．Haworth is a village of small，grey stone houses on the side of a hill in the north of England，and I live in a house at the top of the hill，next to the church and the graveyard．
　　I walked through the graveyard to the church this afternoon．All my family except Anne are buried there．The wind had blown some dead leaves through the door into the church，and I watched them dancing in the sunlight near the grave．Soon I shall be in that grave with my wife and children，under the cold grey stone and dancing leaves．
　　It is dark outside now，and it is very quiet in this house．Charlotte's husband，Mr Nicholls，is reading in his room，and our servant is cooking in the kitchen．Only the three of us live here now．It is very quiet．I can hear the sounds of the wood burning in the fire，and the big clock on the stairs．
　　There is another sound too—the sound of the wind outside．The wind has many voices．It sings and laughs and shouts to itself all night long．Last night it cried like a little child，and I got out of bed and went to the window to listen．
　　There was no child，of course．Only the wind and the grave-stones，cold in the pale moonlight．But I decided then that Iwould write the story of my children，today，before it is too late．Charlotte's friend，Mrs Gaskell，is writing a book about her，and perhaps she will want to read my story．
　　It is a fine story．It began in April 1820，when we came to Haworth for the first time...
　　There was a strong wind blowing that day too，out of a dark，cloudy sky．We could see snow on the moors．The road to Haworth goes up a hill，and there was ice on the stones of the road Maria，my wife，was afraid to ride up the hill in the carts．
　　'We'll walk，children，'she said．'If one of those horses falls down，there'll be a terrible accident．Come on，let's go and see our new house．'
　　She was a small woman，my wife，and not very strong． But she carried the baby，Anne，up the hill in her arms．I carried Emily—she was one and a half years old then．The others walked．My two－year－old son，Patrick Branwell，walked with me，and Charlotte，who was nearly four，walked with her mother．The two oldest children—Elizabeth and Maria—ran on in front．They were very excited，and laughed and talked all the way．
　　The people of Haworth came out to watch us．Some of them helped，but most of them just stood in their doorways and watched．They are very poor people，in this village．I was their new rector．
　　We had seven carts to carry our furniture up that icy hill，but it was hard work for the horses．When we reached our house，the wind was blowing had in our faces．My wife hur－ried inside，and began to light fires．
　　'Do you like it，my dear？'I asked her that night，when the children were in bed．She looked pale and tired．I thought it was because of the long journey，and the children．Perhaps it was．
　　She held out her hands to the fire，and said：'Of course，Patrick．It's a fine house．I do hope it will be a good home for you，and the children．'
　　I was a little surprised by that．'And for you，Maria，'I said．'Don't forget yourself．You are the most important per－son in the world，to me．'
　　She smiled then—a lovely smile．'Thank you，Patrick，'she said．She was a very small woman，and she was often tired because of the children．But when she smiled at me like that，I thought she was the most beautiful woman in England．
　　A year and a half later，she was dead．
　　She did not die quickly．She was in bed for seven long months，in awful pain．The doctor came often，and her sister Elizabeth came too，to help．The children were ill，as well．It was a terrible time．
　　My wife Maria died in September，1821．She was thirty-eight．It was my job to bury her in the church．Our six young children stood and watched quietly．
　　Afterwards，we went back to the house．I called them into this room and spoke to them．
　　I said：'You must not cry too much，my dears．Your mother is with God now．She is happy．One day you will all die，and if you are good，you will go to God too．'
　　'But why？'Maria asked．'Why did she die now，father？We need her．'
　　'This world is a hard place，children，and we cannot under－stand everything that God does．But God loves us，never forget that．Your mother loved you，and perhaps she can see you now．We must all try to work hard，learn as much as possible，and be kind to each other．Will you do that？'
　　'Yes，father．'
　　They all looked so sad，I remember，and they listened so carefully．Little Emily said：'Who will be our mother now？'
　　'Maria is the oldest，so she will help me．You must all listen to her，and do what she says．And your Aunt Elizabeth is here，too．Perhaps she will stay for a while．'
　　Elizabeth did stay．She was older than my wife，and she wasn't married．We called her Aunt Branwell．She came from Penzance in Cornwall，a warm，sunny place by the sea in the south—west of England．It is often cold on the moors behind Haworth，and the winds blow all winter．Aunt Branwell hated Haworth，but she stayed here all her life，to help me with her sister's children．She was a good，kind woman．
　　I was very proud of my little Maria．She was only eight years old，but she worked all day like an adult．She helped the little ones to get washed and dressed；she helped them to play and draw and read．She was like a little mother to them．
　　She could read very well herself．We always had books and newspapers in the house，and I talked to the children about them every day．I talked to them about adult things：the Duke of Wellington，and the important things that he was doing in London．The children listened carefully，and tried hard to un-derstand．Maria often read to the others from the newspaper，and asked me questions about it．She understood it better than most men．
　　I was sure my children were very clever．But I did not have time to talk to them all day；I had my work to do．So，in 1824，I sent them to school．






■ 2 Cowan Bridge School
　　I was born in a small house in Ireland．There were only two rooms in our house，and I had nine brothers and sisters．My parents were very poor．We had no money，and only a small farm．But we did have a church near us， and that church had a school．
　　That school gave me my one chance of success．I worked very hard there，and when I was sixteen，I became a teacher．Then I went to St John's College，Cambridge，to study some more．I became a curate．When I married，I was able to get a good job and a house for my family．I got all that because I worked so hard at school．
　　I wanted my children to go to the best school that I could find．Cowan Bridge School was a school for the daughters of churchmen．It belonged to a churchman—Mr Wilson．He was a good man，I thought．I liked the school，and it was not too expensive．So，in July 1824，I took Maria and Elizabeth there．In September，I took Charlotte and，in November，Emily as well．Emily was just six then，and Charlotte was eight．
　　I remember how quiet the house was that autumn．In the evenings I taught my son，Branwell，and my wife's sister looked after the youngest child，Anne．I often thought about the girls．My eldest，Maria，was a good，clever girl—I thought she must be the best pupil in the school．I waited for her letters，and wondered what new things she was learning．
　　She did tell me some things in her letters，but not enough．She told me she liked the schoolwork，and I was pleased．But she did not tell me about the food，or the cold，or the unkind teachers．Charlotte told me those things，much later．I know Maria did not tell me that the food was often burnt and uneat－able，or that they could not sleep because the beds were too cold．She did not tell me that the poor hungry children had to wash with ice in the morning，and walk through wet snow to sit for two hours with icy feet in a cold church on Sundays． She did not tell me that many of the children at the school were ill．
　　You didn't tell me that， did you，Maria？Did you？Or did you try to write something，and stop because you were afraid of the teachers？You were a good，brave child，and I was so proud of you，so pleased because you were at school．I wanted you to learn everything；I didn't want you to be poor like my sisters．God help me，I thought you were happy at Cowan Bridge School！
　　There were no Christmas holidays at the school，and it was too difficult to travel over the cold，windy hills to visit my little girls．So I sat at home here in Haworth，with Aunt Branwell，my son，and the little girl，Anne．Outside，the wind blew snow over the gravestones，and there was ice on our windows．
　　On Christmas Day little Anne looked lonely．She asked me about her sisters．
　　'Don't worry，my dear，'I said．'They are happy，with the other girls at school．You shall go to Cowan Bridge，too，when you are older．'
　　I remember how strangely she looked at me then．She was only four，and very pretty．She smiled at me，but her face went very white，and her hands started to shake．I don't know why．I thought she was cold，and I put some more wood on the fire．Then Aunt Branwell read her a story from the Bible，and I for－got about it．
　　In February a letter came．It was in an adult's handwriting，not Maria'
　　Many children in the school have been ill，and your daughter Maria...
　　My hand began to shake badly，and I dropped the letter on the floor．As I picked it up，I could see only one word—dead ...If your daughter Maria does not come home soon，she will be dead．
　　I went over the hills to bring her back．My Maria was in a small bed in a cold room upstairs，coughing badly．Elizabeth and Charlotte and Emily stood beside her，waiting for me．They looked so sad and ill and frightened．I remember the big eyes in their small white faces．But I did not bring them home then；the school doctor said it was not necessary． So I took Maria home across the cold，windy moors to Haworth．I sat be－side her in the coach and held her hand all the way．I remem－ber how cold her hand was in mine．Thin cold fingers，that did not move at all．
　　It was too late to save her．She lay in bed upstairs for nearly three months，but she was too ill to eat．Her poor face was white，I remember，and it seemed thin and small like a dead child's．Only her eyes looked alive—big dark eyes in a thin white face．'Don't cry，father，'she said to me once．' I shall be with mother soon，you know．And with God．'
　　I buried Maria beside her mother，and a month later I buried Elizabeth there，too．She became ill at school，and a woman from the school brought her home．I brought Charlotte and Emily home two weeks later．They were here when Elizabeth died．Her body lay all night in a wooden box on the table，and her little sisters and brother kissed her before she was buried．
　　I had wanted so much for these two girls，and now I had nothing．I stood in the church，and looked at the summer flow－ers I had put on their grave．I remembered how my wife had held the girls in her arms，and how she had smiled at me when we looked at them．'They have come back to you now，Maria，'I said．'I am sorry．I am so sorry，my love．'






■ 3 The little books
　　I had four children now— Charlotte，Branwell，Emily and Anne．I did not send them to school again for many years．God's ways are hard to understand，I thought．Perhaps God was not pleased with me；perhaps He wanted Maria and Elizabeth for Himself．I decided to keep the others at home．Aunt Branwell could teach them，and I could help when I had time．
　　They were clever children，quick at learning．They loved to write and draw and paint，and they talked all day long．And，thank God，they were not ill．In the afternoons，my servant，Tabby，took them for long walks on the moors behind the house．They walked for miles on the hilltops in the strong clean wind，alone with the birds and the sheep．I think it was good for them．They grew stronger，and there was a bright light in their eyes．
　　I was not the only sad father in Haworth．Many，many chil-dren died，and I had to bury them all．The water in Haworth was bad，so many children died from illness．And many more died from accidents；I saw a hundred children die from fire．In my house，I was always very careful．I had no curtains，no car－pets，because I was afraid of fire．My children never wore cot－ton clothes，because they burn so easily．
　　One day in 1826 I brought a box of toy soldiers home from Leeds．Next morning the children began to play games with them．
　　'This one is mine！'Charlotte said．'He's the Duke of Wellington！'
　　'And this is mine！'said Branwell．'He's Napoleon Bonaparte！'
　　The children liked the wooden soldiers and began to tell a story about them．It was a very exciting story，I remember．They read it to me and Aunt Branwell and Tabby，our servant．The next day they invented another story，and then another．And then for several days the children were very quiet，and I wondered what they were doing．
　　I went upstairs，and opened their bedroom door．Inside，they were all busily writing or drawing on small pieces of paper．The wooden soldiers were in the middle of the room in front of them．
　　'What are you doing？'I asked．
　　Emily looked up．'Oh，father，please go away，'she said．
　　'We're writing our secret books．'
　　I suppose I looked sad．'What？ Can't I see them？'I asked．
　　They all thought for a minute．Then Charlotte said，very se－riously：'You can see some of them，of course，papa．But they aren't easy to read，because it's very small writing． We'll show them to you when we are ready．'
　　These toy soldiers opened a new world for my children．They showed me some of their stories，but there were hundreds that tney kept secret．They all began writing so young—Charlotte，the oldest，was only ten，and Emily was eight．I don't think they ever stopped．Mr Nicholls has all Charlotte's little books now，in a cupboard in his room．Some of them are no more than five or six centimetres high．They are beautifully made，and full of small pictures and tiny writing．There is one on my desk now，but I can't read it，my eyes are too bad．
　　Charlotte and Branwell wrote about a country called Angria，while Emily and Anne wrote about a land called Gondal．The paple in those countries fought battles and fell in love， and wrote letters and poems．My children wrote these poems and letters，and they wrote books about Angria and Gondal．They drew maps of the countries，wrote newspapers about them， and drew pictures of the towns and people in their stories．They in－vented a new world for themselves．
　　They wrote many of these stories when I was in bed．I used to read to the family，and pray with them in the evening， and then I usually went to bed at nine o'clock．One night，I re-member，I woke up and came down again at ten．There was a noise in my room—this room where I am writing now． I opened the door and saw Charlotte and Branwell with a candle，looking at a picture on my wall．
　　'What are you doing here？'I asked．
　　'We're looking at the picture， papa，'Branwell said．'It's the Duke of Zamorna and the Duke of Northangerland fighting in Glasstown．'
　　I looked at the picture．It's here now behind me．It's a pic－ture of a story in the Bible，with a town，mountains，and hun-dreds of people in It．'What do you mean？'I asked．
　　'It's one of our stories，papa，'Charlotte said．'We have to come in here to look at the picture．Then we invent what hap-pens．'
　　'Tell me，then，'I said．They both looked very excited；their faces were pink，and their eyes were bright in the candlelight．But they looked happy too．I put my candle on the table，and sat down here，where I am sitting now，to listen to their story．
　　It was a wonderful story．Charlotte's wooden soldier，the Duke of Wellington，had had a son，Arthur，Duke of Zamorna．Branwell's toy soldier，Bonaparte，had become the strong， bad，good-looking Duke of Northangerland．The two Dukes were fighting a terrible battle in a city called Glasstown．There were soldiers who died bravely，and beautiful women who fell in love．I listened until two o'clock in the morning．There was much more，but I have forgotten it now．
　　But I remember the excitement in my children's faces．Sometimes I thought they could actually see these people，as they talked．
　　Next day they said no more about it，and I did not ask．It was their own secret world，and they did not let me into it again．But I was pleased they had told me about it once．And sometimes they showed me drawings of places in Angria or Gondal．All my children could draw and paint beautifully．Charlotte used watercolours，and often spent hours painting small pictures．Branwell used oil-paints as well．






■ 4 Growing up
　　When Branwell was fourteen or fifteen，he did a lot of oil－paintings．He painted people in the village，and it was easy to recognize the faces in the pictures．Later，he did a fine painting of his three sisters．I was very proud of him．We all decided he would become a famous artist．
　　Charlotte went to school again when she was fifteen．It was a much better school—Miss Wooler's school at Roe Head．I don't think Charlotte liked school，but she wanted to be a teacher—a governess—so she worked hard．I taught Bran－well at home，and Aunt Branwell taught Emily and Anne．The girls and Branwell were learning to play the piano， and Bran-well played the music in church．
　　Emily and Anne had dogs，and they used to take them for walks on the moors．Anne's dog was called Flossy，and Emily had a big strong one called Keeper．Keeper went everywhere with her—I think Emily loved that dog more than any person．Emily was sometimes a difficult child．She was very shy，and did not often speak to anyone outside the family．When she was older，I sent her to school with Charlotte，but she hated it，so I brought her home and sent Anne instead．
　　Branwell was not shy．He could talk to anyone for hours．Everyone in Haworth liked him．I remember the day in 1835when Branwell went to London．He was eighteen years old，and he was going to the Royal Academy in London to learn to be an artist．He walked down the hill in Haworth with a bag of his best paintings on his back，and everyone in the village came out to see him go．That was a great day for me．
　　Something terrible happened in London，but I don't know what it was．Branwell came back two weeks later，his face white，his clothes dirty．I don't know where he went or what happened in London．He refused to tell me．He just sat upstairs，alone in his room for hours．
　　Later，I paid for a room in Bradford for him to work in．He could paint pictures of famous people there，I thought．It was easy work for him．But he couldn't do it．He spent all my mon－ey，and came home again after a while．
　　This was a sad time for me．My eyes were very bad，and I had to pay a young curate to help me with my work for the church．My old servant，Tabby，broke her leg and was very ill．And then one day I got a letter from Miss Wooler's school．My curate read it to me．
　　Dear Mr Bront，the letter said．I am afraid that your daughter Anne is very ill，and...
　　I don't think I ever moved so fast in all my life．Six hours later，I was at Roe Head．The next day Anne and Charlotte were home．Anne was still alive，thank God！A month later she was well again．Thank God．
　　All my children were safe at home．
　　I was happy to have them here．They were so clever，and kind，and they loved each other so much．But I was an old man with bad eyes，and Aunt Branwell and I had very little money．My children had to find work somewhere，in order to live．
　　But what sort of work could they do？






■ 5 Looking for work
　　I do not remember everything they did．
　　Charlotte and Anne worked as governesses for some months，teaching rich children in big houses， and Branwell got a job like that too，for a while．But they didn't like their work．At home my children were full of talk and laughter，but away from home they were shy，quiet，unhappy．
　　They wrote a lot of letters in their search for work—some－times to famous people．Branwell wanted to be a writer，so he wrote to writers；but not many of them wrote back．He began to look pale and sad in those days，and he was often in the vil－lage pub，drinking and talking to the people there．Then he got a job selling tickets on the railways，and left home．
　　The girls had an idea．I remember the day when they told me about it．Charlotte and Anne were at home on holiday，and we were all in the sitting-room after dinner one evening． Anne was playing the piano，and singing quietly to herself．She was the prettiest of the three girls，I suppose．She had long wavy brown hair，and a gentle，kind face Emily sat on the floor be-side her，stroking the ears of her dog，Keeper．Charlotte sat op- posite me on the sofa，like a little child with a serious，thought- ful face．She was the smallest；her feet were no bigger than my hands．
　　She looked at me carefully．'Papa，'she said．'We want to start a school．'
　　'Really，my dear？ Where？'
　　'Here．'
　　'But Charlotte，my dear，we have no room．This house is full already．'
　　'Oh，but we could change the house，papa．We could build a schoolroom．'
　　'Well，yes，I suppose so，'I said．'But—why do you want to do this？Isn't it better to work as governesses，in some big fine house？'
　　'Oh no，papa！'All three girls spoke at once．Anne had stopped playing，and Emily looked very angry and frightening．I could see they had thought hard about this．
　　Charlotte said：'The life of a governess is terrible，papa！A governess has no time of her own，no friends，no one to talk to，and if she gets angry with the children，they just run to their mother．I couldn't possibly be a governess all my life！'
　　'It's true，papa，'Anne said．'It's an awful life．We're so lonely away from each other．Why can't we have a school，and all live here？Then we can take care of you and Aunt Branwell when you get old．'
　　I looked at Emily．Her eyes were shining；I could see that the idea was important to her too．
　　'But why will people send their children here？' I asked．'Haworth is not a big town，or a beautiful place．How will you find children to teach？'
　　'We have thought of that too，papa，'Charlotte said．'We must learn more，and become better teachers．I have spoken to Aunt Branwell，and she will give us the money，if you agree．Emily and I want to go to Belgium，to learn French．If we can speak French well，then parents will send their children to us to learn that．'
　　'Emily will go？'I said．I looked at her．Emily had only been away from home twice，and each time she had been very un-happy．But now she looked excited．
　　'Yes，papa，'she said．'I will go．Charlotte is right— we must do something．And this will help us to stay together．'
　　'And Anne？'
　　'I will stay as a governess with the Robinson family，'Anne said sadly．'There's not enough money for us all to go，and ...the Robinsons are not so very bad．'
　　It was always like that．Anne was a gentle girl；she did not fight as hard as the others．Perhaps her life was easier because of that．I don't know．
　　But I thought it was a wonderful idea．I wrote to Belgium，and found them places in a school in Brussels，which was owned by a Monsieur Héger．I agreed to take the girls there，and for a month I wrote down French words in a little pocket book，to help me on the journey．Then，one afternoon in 1824，we caught the train to London．
　　I had not been to London for over twenty years，and my daughters had never been there．We stayed for three days，and then we took the night boat to Belgium，and arrived at a tall，fine school building in the centre of Brussels．
　　Héger himself was a very polite，friendly man—very kind．He did not always understand my French，but he showed me round the school，and talked a lot，very fast．I smiled， and tried to answer．
　　The two girls were very excited when I left them．As I came home on the boat，I thought：'This is a good thing，a fine thing，perhaps．My daughters will start a good school， and Ha－worth will become famous．I hope Branwell can make a success of his life，too．Then my wife Maria will be pleased with us all．'






■ 6 Monsieur Héger and Mrs Robinson
　　At first everything went well．Monsieur Héger wrote to me often．He was pleased with my daughters，he said；they were good pupils．But life at home in Haworth was hard．My curate died， and Aunt Branwell became very ill． Emily and Charlotte came home to see her， but she was dead before they arrived．
　　She was a good woman，Elizabeth Branwell．She kept my home for more than twenty years， and she taught my daughters everything she knew． But she never liked Haworth， I am sure of that．She said it was a cold，miserable place．I hope that God has found somewhere warm and comfortable for her now．
　　But how could I live without her？My eyes were now very bad，and I could not see to read．And our servant Tabby was older than I was．Anne could not help me—she was a gov－erness for the Robinson family，and now Branwell had a job there too，teaching their young son．So Charlotte went back to Brussels alone，this time as a teacher in Monsieur Héger's school．Emily stayed at home to cook and clean for me．She did not like Brussels，she said．She was happy to do the housework，and live at home with Tabby and me．
　　She was a strange，quiet girl，Emily．She was the tallest of the girls，and in some ways she was as strong as a man．She loved to walk by herself on the wild lonely moors， with her dog Keeper running by her side．Sometimes I saw her there，singing or talking quietly to herself，and I thought perhaps she could see the people in her secret world of Gondal，and was talking to them．I know that she spent a lot of time writing alone in her room；and when Anne was at home，she and Emily often talked and wrote about the world of Gondal together．
　　There were sometimes dangerous people near Haworth， so I always had a gun in the house．Before my eyes were bad，I taught Emily to shoot—she loved that．Sometimes I used to practise shooting in the garden while she was making bread in the kitchen．I shot first，then I called Emily．She came out， cleaned her hands， picked up the gun， shot， and went back in to finish the bread．She was much better at shooting than I was．
　　But by 1844 my eyes were too bad for shooting．Emily cooked，cleaned the house， played the piano．And almost every day she went for long walks on the moors with her dog，Keeper．
　　She loved that dog， but she could be very hard with him，too．We did not let him go upstairs，but one day Tabby found him on my bed．Emily was very angry；her face was white and hard．Keeper was a big， strong dog， but she pulled him down－stairs and hit him again and again until the dog was nearly blind．Then she gently washed his cuts herself．He never went upstairs again．
　　Charlotte was another year in Brussels．When she came home，she was quiet and sad．Sometimes she wrote long letters in French to Monsieur Héger，but no letters came from him．But this was a time of hope，too．The girls wrote advertise－ments for their new school，and sent them to newspapers，and to everybody they knew．It was exciting—they were good ad-vertisements，and we waited for the first children to come．
　　We waited a long time，and Charlotte wrote more advertise-ments．
　　No children came．
　　Every day Charlotte and Emily waited for a letter from the postman，or for a parent to come to see them．Every day they became more miserable．
　　Anne left her job with the Robinsons and came home to Ha－worth．A month later Branwell also came home，for a holiday．
　　And then one morning，early，there was a knock on the door．Charlotte ran to open it．But it was not a parent—it was a letter for her brother Branwell．He went upstairs with it，smiling．
　　A few minutes later there was a terrible scream．We ran up－stairs to Branwell's room．He lay on his bed，screaming，with a white face and wild dark eyes．The letter was in his hand．
　　'Branwell！What is it？What's the matter？'I asked．
　　He tore his hair with his hands．'I'm ill，'he said．'I'm cold —Oh，what does it matter？She doesn't care...I can't see her...Oh，it's all finished now，finished for ever！I'll die without her！'
　　'Here，Branwell，drink this．'Emily brought him a cup of hot milk，but his hand was shaking and he nearly dropped it．
　　Charlotte put her hand on his head．'He's hot，papa，he's burning，'she said．'You must go to bed at once，Branwell．'
　　He went to bed，and he lay there，sometimes sleeping，some－times shouting and crying．I tried to talk to him，but I couldn't understand what he said．Then，later，Anne explaind．
　　She told us a terrible story．I was so angry！I nearly broke a chair with my hands as I listened．My son Branwell，Anne said，was in love with Mrs Robinson，the rich mother of his pupil．For months this lady had spoken kindly to Branwell，walked with him in the garden，talked to him alone in the evenings．He tnought she would marry him when her husband died．And then there were other things，that Anne did not want to speak about．
　　The letter was from Mr Robinson．He was often ill，Anne told us，but his children knew about Branwell and their mother，and the servants knew too，I think．Perhaps Mr Robin－son had learnt something from them，or perhaps that woman（I cannot call her a wife） had told him everything．Only one thing was certain—in his letter Mr Robinson had ordered Branwell never to return to his house or to speak to any of his family again．
　　My face was hot and my hands were shaking．I tried to talk to Branwell about it，but it was impossible．
　　'I love her，papa！'he shouted．'You don't understand—how can you？You've never seen her！'
　　'I don't want to see her，my son，'I said．'I understand that she is a bad，evil woman．I hope that God will punish her and…'
　　'Don't say that，papa！'he screamed．'You are talking about the woman I love！She will call me back！I will see her again！'
　　'I hope you never see her again，my son，'I said．'You must forget her．Branwell，listen to me…'
　　But he did not listen．He ran out of the house．He did not come back until the evening，and then he was drunk．He did not listen that day，or the next day，or any day．He began to drink laudanum as well．I thought he would kill himself．
　　So I think Charlotte was pleased that no parents came．No school could have a man like Branwell in it．






■ 7 Currer， Ellis，and Acton Bell
　　At about this time，in 1845，I was almost blind．I had a new curate to do my work-Arthur Nicholls，a young man of twenty－eight．He came from Northern Ireland like my－self．He was a good，hard worker．I spoke in the church on Sundays，but Arthur Nicholls did the rest of my work．
　　Branwell became worse and worse．Mr Robinson died in 1846，but Mrs Robinson didn't marry Branwell—oh no！She was a cold wicked woman．She sent my son Branwell away，and later married a rich old man．And so Branwell spent more and more time drinking，and taking laudanum，and walking alone on the moors．
　　When you are blind， you listen to things very carefully．I used to sit alone in my room and listen to the sounds of the wind outside the house．The wind talks and whispers and sings -it has many voices．I listened to the sounds of the clock on the stairs，and the wood in the fire，and the footsteps and voices of the girls walking round the house．They talked a lot to each other，and sometimes I could hear what they said，even when they were in another room．
　　Anne had had a poem published in a magazine，and one day I heard a conversation between Charlotte and Emily．Charlotte had found something that Emily had written， and was talking to her about it．
　　'But they're wonderful，Emily，'Charlotte said．'They're much better than mine or Anne's．'
　　'They're not for people to read，'Emily said．'They're part of the Gondal story．Nobody would understand them，except me and Anne．'
　　I realized that they were talking about some poems of Emily's．I knew that Emily and Anne wrote a lot about the country of Gondal，but I didn't know much about it．Emily kept all her papers locked in her desk．
　　Charlotte was arguing with her．'Emily，listen to me！ These are fine poems．I think we should put some of them in a book，togetner with mine and Anne's，and try to publish it．People should read them！'
　　'No！'Emily shouted．Then her dog Keeper began to bark，and I didn't hear any more．But I think they talked about this again several times．I often heard voices arguing，and usually they never argued about their writing．
　　I wanted to tell them not to do it．I had published several small books myself，but I always lost money．I had to pay the publisher to print the books，and not many people bought them．It's an easy way to lose money．But I was too ill，so I said nothing．
　　I learnt，many years later，that they paid over￡30 to have a book of poems printed，and that it sold two copies．I am not surprised that they didn't tell me about it； we had very little
　　I began to feel that there was something wrong with my head，as well as my eyes．Several times the postman brought an old packet to our house，which was addressed to a man called Currer Bell．I told him that no Currer Bell lived in Haworth，and sent him away．But then，a month or two later，he came back again，with the same old packet．
　　In the summer of 1846 Charlotte took me to see an eye doc－tor in Manchester．We stayed in rooms in the town．The doctor decided to operate on my eyes， and the next morning we got up early．I was afraid．Could I hold my head still while the doctor cut into my eyes with a knife？ Perhaps the pain would be too terrible．Perhaps I would move，or stand up， or…
　　Charlotte held my hand．As we left our rooms，we met a postman．
　　'Good morning，Miss，'he said．'There's packet here for Currer Bell．'
　　'Oh…thank you．'Charlotte sounded sad，but she took the packet，and put it in her room．She did not open it．Then we walked to the eye doctor's．
　　The pain was terrible，but it was over in fifteen minutes， and I didn't move．Afterwards，I had to lie on a bed in a dark room．We couldn't go home for a month．A nurse came some－times，but Charlotte stayed with me all day．
　　I asked her once about the packet．She said：' Oh，it's for a friend of mine，papa．It had a letter for me in it．I have posted it away again now．'
　　I didn't understand，but I didn't ask again．I lay quietly on my bed most of the day， and Charlotte sat in the next room writing．She wrote very fast，for many hours， and never put her pen down once．She seemed quiet，but strangely happy．
　　I was happy too．The doctor had helped；I could see again．It was wonderful-the colours，the shapes of everything were beautiful．When we came back to Haworth，I could see every-thing clearly at last-our home，the church，the graveyard，the moors， the faces of my Emily and Anne！
　　And Branwell．
　　Branwell's face looked terrible．White， thin，with big dark eyes and untidy hair．His clothes were dirty，he smelt， his hands shook．All the time he was either shouting or crying．And always， every day，he asked me for money．
　　I let him sleep in my room at night，and he kept me awake for hours talking about Mrs Robinson．I remembered his paint－ings，his stories，his happy childish laughter．My fine， clever son had become a drunken animal．
　　The winter of 1846 was terribly cold．The wind blew snow around the house and over the gravestones．A lot of children died in the village．Anne was ill，Branwell was worse．We lit fires in all the rooms，but there was ice inside the windows in the mornings．I spent most of my time with Branwell，so I didn't think very much about the girls．
　　And then，one afternoon，Charlotte came into my room．I was sitting here，in this same chair，beside the fire．She had a book in her hand， and that strange，happy look on her face．
　　'Papa，'she said．'I've been writing a book．'
　　I smiled．'Have you，my dear？'I thought she had written another little book about Angria．
　　'Yes， and I want you to read it．'
　　'Oh，I'm afraid it will hurt my eyes too much．'My eyes were much better，but the tiny writing in the Angria books was too small for me．
　　'Oh no，'she said．'It's not in my handwriting；it is printed．'She held out the book in her hand．
　　'My dear！Think how much it will cost！You will almost certainly lose money，because no one will buy it！No one knows your name ！'
　　'I don't think so，father．I didn't pay to get it printed，you know．The publishers paid me．Listen to what people say about it in these magazines．'
　　She sat down， and read to me from some of the most famous magazines in England．There were long articles in them，about a book called Jane Eyre， by Currer Bell．They were kind arti－cles；most of the magazine writers liked the book．
　　'This Currer Bell， then，'I ashed．'Is it you？'
　　Charlotte laughed．'Yes，papa．It's a man's name， with the same first letters：CB—Charlotte Bront， Currer Bell．'
　　She gave me the book，and went out．I began to read．
　　I think I read for two hours， but it seemed like ten minutes．It was a wonderful，beautiful book—the story of a little girl called Jane Eyre．Her parents are dead，so she lives with an un－kind aunt and her children．Then Jane goes away to a school called Lowood．This school is a terrible place，and it is very like the school at Cowan Bridge．Jane Eyre's best friend， Helen Burns，falls ill at the school， and dies． This Helen is just like my own little Maria．When I read about her death，my eyes fillled with tears．But it was a beautiful book， too；I did not want to put it down．
　　At five o'clock I got up and went into the sitting－room． My three daughters sat there waiting for me．Their eyes were very bright．I still had tears in my eyes，but I had a big smile on my face too．I held up Jane Eyre in my hand，and said：'Girls，do you know Charlotte has written a book？ And it is more than good， you know—it is very， very fine indeed！'






■ 8 The best days， and the worst days
　　Emily and Anne did know，of course．They had known about Charlotte's book for a long time．Jane Eyre was not the first book that Charlotte had sent to a publisher．Over a year ago she had written another book，The Professor， and sent it to one publisher after another．Each publisher had sent it back，in a packet addressed to Currer Bell．And then Charlotte had sent it， in the same old packet，to another publisher， and then another，and got it back again．
　　'Why didn't you change the paper on the packet， my dear？'I asked．
　　Charlotte smiled．'I didn't think of it， papa．The worst day was when we were in Manchester，going to the eye doctor．Do you remember？The packet came back then．That was the day before I started writing Jane Eyre．'
　　'Do you mean that you started writing Jane Eyre while I was lying in that dark room in Manchester？'
　　'That's right，papa．'
　　'But that's only six months ago， and here is the book in my hand！'
　　'Yes，papa．The book was printed a month after I sent it to the publisher．'
　　'My dear！They decided very quickly that they liked it，then！'
　　' I think they did，papa．After all，it is a good book，isn't it？'
　　She smiled at me． I don't think I have ever seen her so hap－py．She is a very small person，Charlotte，and not a beautiful woman；but when she smiles like that，her face shines like a fine painting．My wife，Maria，used to look like that sometimes when I first met her．
　　I took her hand in mine．'It is a very good book，my dear．I cannot tell you how proud I am．'
　　She touched my hand．'Thank you，papa．But you must not be proud of me alone，you know．Anne and Emily-'
　　'Oh no，Charlotte，please！'Emily said．
　　But Charlotte did not stop．'…．Anne and Emily have writ－ten books too-books just as good as mine—and their books will soon be published as well！Let me introduce you，papa．These young ladies are not your daughters— they are Acton Bell and Ellis Bell，brothers of the famous writer Currer Bell！'
　　Emily's face was bright red， but Anne and Charlotte started laughing．I was very surprised．
　　'All three of you！'I said．'But…but why do you use these strange names？'
　　'Because people are stupid，papa，'Anne said．'No one thinks women can write good books，so we have used men's names instead．And now they say that Currer Bell is a writer who understands women very well！'She laughed again．
　　'My dears，my dears！' I held out my hands to them， and kissed each of them in turn．'I don't know what to say．I am so pleased for you all．You have made your old papa happy to－day．'Something in Emily's face stopped me．'Emily？You will let me read your book，won't you？'
　　She thought for a moment．'Yes，papa．Of course．But… it's very different from Charlotte's．I'm not sure you'll like it．'
　　'You yourself are very different from Charlotte，my dear，but I love you both．You must show me the book as soon as it comes-and you too，Anne．'
　　I read both their books that winter．They were very differ－ent．Anne's book-Agnes Grey-was the story of an un－happy governess．As I read it，I was sad to think how miserable Anne had been，in a big house away from home，where no one understood her．It was a good book，but it was harder to read than Jane Eyre．
　　Emily's book was called Wuthering Heights．It was a terri－ble，frightening，wonderful story．There is love in it，and hate，and fear，and a man called Heathcliff，who is strong and cruel like the devill himself．I read it late one night when the wind was screaming round the house， blowing snow against all the windows，and sometimes I was afraid． When I got up to go to bed，I saw Emily sitting quietly by the fire．She was stroking her big dog，Keeper，with one hand，and drawing a picture with the other．
　　She looked like a quiet，gentle young woman，I thought．Tall，pretty，and also… There was something different about her．Something very strange and very strong．There was some－thing in her that was stronger than any of her sisters，even Charlotte．Something stronger than even me，or her brother Branwell．
　　Much stronger than Branwell．
　　All that year Branwell was very ill．He spent more and more time drinking．He slept most of the day，and was awake half of then night．His face was white，his hands shook when he tried to write．His sisters didn't tell him about their books，or show him the new ones that they were writing．They were afraid that he would be unhappy about their success，because he had wanted to be a writer himself．He made life hard for all of us．
　　Is September 1848 he became very ill．He coughed all day and all night．He began to talk of death，and asked us to pray with him．While we stood together，praying，he began to cough again．He fell to the ground．Emily and I put our arms round him，but he couldn't get up． There was blood on his mouth，and on Emily's dress．
　　When he stopped coughing，it was because he had stopped breathing．My only son was dead．
　　We buried him in the church beside his mother and little sis－ters．It was a cold，rainy afternoon．There were dead wet leaves in the graveyard，and the wind blew rain into our faces．I came back into the house soon afterwards，but Emily walked for an hour or two in the rain with her dog，Keeper．When she came back into the house，her dress was wet through．
　　Several days later Emily became ill．Her face was hot，she couldn't eat，she kept moving round the house．It was difficult for her to breathe，and it took her a long time to climb the stairs．Charlotte felt her heart—it was beating a hundred and fifteen times a minute．
　　'Let me call a doctor，Emily，' Charlotte said．
　　But Emily refused．'If he comes，I won't talk to him．'
　　'Then go to bed and rest，please．I can light a fire in your room，and bring you milk and read to you if you like．You need rest，sister！'
　　'I…do…not！'said Emily slowly．She had to breathe hard between each word，and her face was as white as Branwell's had been．'My body…doesn't… matter now．I don't…care…about it．I'll live…as I always…have．'
　　And so，every day，she got up at seven o'clock，dressed her－self，and stayed downstairs until ten at night．She ate little or nothing，and coughed for hours．Sometimes she coughed blood．She never went out of the house，but one day Charlotte brought some heather from the moors for her to look at． Emily was lying on the black sofa in the sitting－room．Her dog，Keep－er，lay on the floor in front of her．
　　'Look，Emily，'Charlotte said．'I've found some purple heather for you．There are still one or two flowers left on the moor．
　　'Where？'Emily asked．
　　'Here．Look．'Charlotte held out the small，bright purple flower．
　　Emily turned and looked at Charlotte， but I don't think she could see the heather．Her eyes were too bad． Charlotte put it in Emily's hands，but after a moment Emily dropped it on the floor．
　　At last she said：'Charlotte，I…will see…the doctor now． If he…comes．'Then she closed her eyes．
　　Emily was so thin，and her white skin looked like paper． I knew it was too late，but I said to Anne：'Quick！Put on your coat and fetch him，now！'
　　We did not have long to wait．The doctor came，half an hour later，to tell us what we already knew． Emily，my daughter，was dead．
　　1848 was a year of funerals．I buried many children from the village that year．There was a lot of sadness in Haworth．As I came out of the church with the dead flowers from Emily's grave，I saw three other families walk past me．They had come to visit the graves of their own dead children．
　　The people understood that their children were with God，but no one could explain that to Emily's dog，Keeper．He fol－lowed us to her funeral，and for weeks afterwards，he lay out－side her bedroom and howled．






■ 9 Arthur Nicholls
　　That was not the end of my sadness．Anne，too，became ill．She could not breathe，she coughed，her face was white．But she was more sensible than Emily．She took all her medicines，and did everything the doctors said．It didn't help much．In the spring she said she wanted to go to the sea，to a warmer place．The doctors told her to wait．I thought she would die before she went．
　　At last，in May， Charlotte went away with her． They went to York first，where they visited a wonderful church，York Minster．'If men can make something as beautiful as this，'Anne whispered，'what is God's real home like？'
　　Charlotte told me this in a letter she sent from Scarborough，a town by the sea on the north-east coast．
　　'On 26th May Anne rode a donkey on the beach，'the letter said．'She was very happy，papa．Afterwards we went to church and then sat and watched the sea for a long time．On the 28th she was too ill to go out． She died quietly at two o'clock in the afternoon．She will be buried in a graveyard near the sea．'
　　Anne was the baby of the family，the youngest and prettiest of them all．Before she died，she wrote another book-The Tenant of Wildfell Hall—about a woman who left her cruel husband．She was proud of it，and so was I．She was twenty-nine years old．I don't want to die，papa，'she said．' I have too many ideas in my head，too many books to write．'
　　When Charlotte came home the dogs barked happily．Per－haps they thought Anne and Emily and Branwell were coming home too—I don't know．But it was only Charlotte．The smallest of all my children．Not the prettiest，not the strongest，not the strangest．God had taken all those for himself．He had left me with the one who would become the most famous．And the one who nearly had a child．
　　Charlotte wrote two more books：Shirley，about a strong brave woman like her sister Emily；and Villette，about love be－tween a teacher and a pupil．But Jane Eyre was her most fa－mous book．Everyone in England talked abut it；everyone wanted to read it．
　　Charlotte went to London and met many famous writers． I was very pleased；I loved to hear about the people and places that she saw．But she always came back to Haworth；she didn't like to be with famous people very long．And this quiet place was her home．
　　In 1852，just before Christmas，a terrible thing happened．I heard some of it from my room．My curate，Arthur Nicholls，opened the door to Charlotte's sitting－room， and stood there．His face was white，and he was shaking．
　　'Yes，Mr Nicholls？'Charlotte said．'Do you want to come in？'
　　'No，Miss Charlotte—that is， yes． I mean— I have some－thing important to say to you．'
　　I heard his voice stop for a moment and then he went on．'I have always…felt strongly about you，Miss Charlotte，and…my feelings are stronger，much stronger，than you know．And，well， the fact is， Miss Charlotte， that…I am asking you to be my wife．'
　　There was a long silence．I heard every word，and I felt cold and angry．Mr Nicholls was a good curate，but that was all．I paid him ￡100 a year to help me with my work，but he had no place in my house，or in my daughter's bed！I stood up， and opened my door．
　　'Mr，Nichols！'
　　He turned and looked at me．I could see Charlotte behind him．
　　'You will leave this house at once，Mr Nicholls．I am very，very angry！You must not speak to my daughter again-ever！Do you understand me？'
　　The stupid man was shaking and almost crying！I thought he was ill．He opened his mouth to speak，but no words came out．Then he turned and went out of the door．
　　Mr Nicholls stayed in his own house for three days．He re－fused to eat，the stupid man， and he sent me some angry letters．But Charlotte wrote to him，to say that she would not marry him．Then Mr Nicholls said he would leave Haworth，and go to Australia．
　　On his last day，in church， he had to give people bread to eat．But when he held out the bread to Charlotte，he could not do it， because he was shaking and crying so much． Afterwards，the people of Haworth gave him a gold watch．He cried aboutthat， too．
　　I thought it was all finished，but I was wrong．I think he wrote to Charlotte，and she wrote back．In April of 1854，he came back to Haworth．Charlotte brought him into my room． I looked at him， but I said nothing． I was not pleased．
　　'Papa，'Charlotte said．'Mr Nicholls and I have something to say to you．'
　　I did not like that．'Mr Nicholls and I…'It did not sound good to me．
　　'I am busy，'I said．'I have a lot of work．'
　　Charlotte smiled．'That's because you don't have a good curate，papa．When Mr Nicholls was here，your life was easy．'
　　'Perhaps，'I said．'But he was going to Australia， I thought．Why haven't you gone，sir？'
　　Mr Nicholls spoke for the first time．He looked very tall and proud，I thought．'There are two reasons，sir，'he said．'First，because I have decided not to go to Australia．And also…'
　　He stopped，and looked down at Charlotte． She smiled up at him，and I felt my blood run cold．
　　'…and also，because your daughter Charlotte and I would like to be married．We have come to ask you to agree．'
　　I don't remember what I said next．I think there were a lot of unkind words between us，and some tears．But in the end I agreed．I agreed because Charlotte wanted it，not because of Arthur Nicholls．
　　In June that year they were married in my church．I did not go—I could not give Charlotte away to that man．But he came back here to be my curate， and he and Charlotte lived in this house with me．He is still here now．
　　Perhaps he will read this． If he does， he will know that he was right，and I was wrong．Mr Nicholls was，after all，a good husband for Charlotte．I understood，after a while， that he honestly loved her， and he could make her happy．She began to smile and laugh again．Her eyes shone，she sang sometimes as she worked．Our house became a home again．
　　She went with him to see his family in Ireland，and travelled to the far west of that country．Mr Nicholls did most of my church work for me． Charlotte began a new book Emma，she called it．And one day in December 1854 she came into my room，smiling．I could see that she was excited．
　　'What is it，my dear？ Have you finished your book？'
　　'No，not yet，papa．But I have something wonderful to tell you．What do you think？'
　　'I don't know，my dear． If it's not your book，then…'
　　'I told Arthur yesterday．I am going to have a child．'
　　I did not say anything．Her hand was on the table and I put my hand on it gently．It was wonderful news．I remembered when my own wife，Maria，had told me this， and how this house had been full of the laughter of little voices，and the noise of running feet．Charlotte and I sat like that for a long time， re-membering．
　　It did not happen．At Christmas she fell ill， and in the New Year she was worse．She felt sick all the time because of the baby， and she ate nothing．She lay in bed all day，hot and coughing．Arthur Nicholls cared for her wonderfully——I think he often stayed awake all night．But it did not help．
　　On 31st March 1855 the last of my six children died． It was early in the morning．Arthur Nicholls was sitting by her bed，and I was standing by the door．She was asleep with her hand in his．Her face was very thin and pale．
　　She opened her eyes and saw him．Then she coughed，and I saw fear in her face．
　　'Oh God，'she whispered．I am not going to die， am I ？Please don't take me away from Arthur now-we have been so happy．'
　　Those were the last words she ever said．A little while later，I walked slowly out of the house．As I went into the graveyard，the church bell began to ring．It was ringing to tell Haworth and all the world that Charlotte Bront was dead．






■ 10 Maria
　　And so now I have written it．It is three o'clock in the morning．The house is very quiet and the wind has stopped．I can hear the sound of the wood burning in the fire and the clock on the stairs．Somewhere upstairs Arthur Nicholls is sleeping quietly．
　　I know that Charlotte's friend， Mrs Gaskell， has nearly fin－ished her book about Charlotte．Perhaps I will show her what I have written．
　　Perhaps．But I don't think so．I wrote to her before，and an-swered her questions，and that is enough．She is a writer， she can write her own book．I will keep this book in my desk，for myself—and perhaps for Arthur Nicholls．There is no need for other people to read it． My daughter Charlotte is famous al－ready，and when Mrs Gaskell has written about her，she will be more famous still．
　　I wish my wife Maria could read Charlotte's books—and Emily's，and Anne's．Perhaps she can． We had some fine children， didn't we， Maria？
　　I wonder if she can hear me．It is a fine night，now that the wind has stoppod．There is a bright moon，and the sky is full of stars．I think I will go outside，and walk through the graveyard to the church，and talk to Maria there．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Tooth And Claw by Saki





■ Sredni Vashtar
　　Conradin was ten years old and was often ill．
　　'The boy is not strong，'said the doctor．'He will not live much longer．'But the doctor did not know about Conradin's imagination． In Conradin's lonely， loveless world，his imagination was the only thing that kept him alive．
　　Conradin's parents were dead and he lived with his aunt．The aunt did not like Conradin and was often unkind to him．Conradin hated her with all his heart， but he obeyed her quietly and took his medicine without arguing． Mostly he kept out of her way．She had no place in his world． His real， everyday life in his aunt's colourless， comfortless house was narrow and uninteresting． But inside his small， dark head exciting and violent thoughts ran wild． In the bright world of his imagination Conradin was strong and brave． It was a wonderful world， and the aunt was locked out of it．
　　The garden was no fun． There was nothing interesting to do． He was forbidden to pick the flowers． He was forbidden to eat the fruit． He was forbidden to play on the grass But behind some trees， in a forgotten corner of the garden， there was an old shed Nobody used the shed， and Conradin took it for his own．
　　To him it became something between a playroom and a church． He filled it with ghosts and animals from his imagination． But there were also two living things in the shed． In one corner lived an old， untidy-looking chicken． Conradin had no people to love， and this chicken was the boy's dearest friend．And in a dark， secret place at the back of the shed was a large wooden box with bars across the front． This was the home of a very large ferret with long， dangerous teeth and claws．Conradin had bought the ferret and its box from a friendly boy， who lived in the village． It had cost him all his money，but Conradin did not mind．He was most terribly afraid of the ferret， but he loved it with all his heart． It was his wonderful，terrible secret． He gave the ferret a strange and beautiful name and it became his god．
　　The aunt went to church every Sunday． She took Conradin with her， but to Conradin her church and her god were without meaning． They seemed grey and uninteresting．The true god lived in the shed， and his name was Sredni Vashtar．
　　Every Thursday， in the cool， silent darkness of the shed，Conradin took presents to his god． He took flowers in summer and fruits in autumn， and he made strange and wonderful songs for his god． Sometimes， on days when something important happened， Conradin took special presents．He stole salt from the kitchen and placed it carefully and lovingly in front of the ferret's box．
　　One day the aunt had the most terrible toothache． It con tinued for three days． Morning and evening Conradin put salt in front of his god． In the end he almost believed that Sredni Vashtar himself had sent the toothache．
　　After a time the aunt noticed Conradin's visits to the shed．
　　'It's not good for him to play out there in the cold，' she said． She could always find a reason to stop Conradin enjoying himself． The next morning at breakfast she told Conradin that she had sold the chicken． She looked at Conradin's white face , and waited for him to cry or to be angry． But Conradin said nothing； there was nothing to say．
　　Perhaps the aunt felt sorry． That afternoon there was hot buttered toast for tea． Toast was usually forbidden． Conradin loved it， but the aunt said that it was bad for him． Also， it made extra work for the cook． Conradin looked at the toast and quietly took a piece of bread and butter．
　　'I thought you liked toast，' the aunt said crossly．
　　'Sometimes，'said Conradin．
　　In the shed that evening Conradin looked sadly at the empty corner where his chicken had lived． And， for the first time， he asked his ferret-god to do something for him．
　　'Do one thing for me， Sredni Vashtar，'he said softly．
　　He did not say what he wanted． Sredni Vashtar was a god， after all． There is no need to explain things to gods．Then， with a last look at the empty corner， Conradin returned to the world that he hated．
　　And every night， in the shed and in his bedroom， Con radin repeated again and again．
　　'Do one thing for me， Sredni Vashtar．'
　　So Conradin's visits to the shed continued． The aunt no ticed， and went to look in the shed again．
　　'What are you keeping in that locked box？' she asked．' I'm sure you're keeping an animal there． It's not good for you．
　　Conradin said nothing．
　　The aunt searched his bedroom until she found the key to the box． She marched down to the shed． It was a cold afternoon， and Conradin was forbidden to go outside． From the window of the dining－room Conradin could just see the door of the shed． He stood and waited．
　　He saw the aunt open the shed door． She went inside．Now， thought Conradin， she has found the box． She is opening the door， and feeling about inside the box where my god lives．
　　'Do one thing for me， Sredni Vashtar，'said Conradin softly． But he said it without hope． She will win， he thought．She always wins． Soon she will come out of the shed and give her orders． Somebody will come and take my wonderful god away-not a god any more，just a brown ferret in a box．Then there will be nothing important in my life… The doctor will be right． I shall sicken and die． She will win． She always wins… In his pain and misery， Conradin began to sing the song of his god：
　　Sredni Vashtar went into battle．
　　His thoughts were red thoughts and his teeth were white．
　　his enemies called for peace but be brought them death．
　　Sredni Vashtar the Beautiful．
　　Suddenly he stopped singing and went nearer to the window．The door of the shed was still open． Slowly， very slowly the minutes went by． Conradin watched the birds on the grass．He counted them， always with one eye on that open door． The unsmiling housekeeper came in with the tea things． Still Sonradin stood and watched and waited． Hope was growing，like a small， sick flower， in his heart． Very softly he sang his song again， and his hope grew and grew． And then he saw a very wonderful thing．
　　Out of the shed came a long， low， yellow－and－brown animal． There were red， wet stains around its mouth and neck．
　　'Sredni Vashtar！' said Conradin softly． The ferret－god made its way to the bottom of the garden． It stopped for a moment， then went quietly into the long grass and disappeared for ever．
　　'Tea is ready，' said the housekeeper． 'Where is your aunt？'
　　'She went down to the shed，' said Conradin．
　　And， while the housekeeper went down to call the aunt，Conradin took the toasting－fork out of the dining－room cupboard． He sat by the fire and toasted a piece of bread for himself． While he was toasting it and putting butter on it，Conradin listened to the noises beyond the dining room door．First there were loud screams-that was the housekeeper．Then there was the cook's answering cry．Soon there came the sound of several pairs of feet． They were carrying something heavy into the house．
　　'Who is going to tell that poor child？' said the housekeeper．
　　'Well， someone will have to，'answered the cook． And，while they were arguing， Conradin made himself another piece of toast．






■ The Story-Teller
　　It was a hot， airless afternoon． The train was slow and the next stop was nearly an hour away． The people in the train were hot and tired． There were three small children and their aunt， and a tall man， who was a bachelor． The bachelor did not know the little family，and he did not want to know them．
　　The aunt and the children talked， but it was not a real conversation． It was more like a battle with a small housefly which will not go away． When the aunt spoke to the children，she always began with 'Don't… 'When the children spoke to her， they always began with'Why…'The bachelor said nothing aloud．
　　The small boy opened his mouth and closed it again． It made an interesting little noise， so he did it again． Open．Close． Open． Close．
　　'Don't do that， Cyril，'said the aunt．' Come and look out of the window．'The boy closed his mouth and sat next to the window． He looked out at the green fields and trees．
　　'Why is that man taking those sheep out of that field？'he asked suddenly．
　　'Perhaps he's taking them to another field where there is more grass，'said the aunt． It was not a very good answer，and the boy knew it．
　　'But there is lots of grass in that field，' he said．'The field is full of grass， Aunt． Why doesn't the man leave his sheep in that field？'
　　'I suppose the grass in the other field is better， ' answered the aunt．
　　'Why is it better？'asked Cyril at once．
　　'Oh， look at those cows！'cried the aunt． There were cows in nearly all the fields along the railway line． Cyril did not look at the cows． He wanted an answer to his question．
　　'Why is the grass in the other field better？' he said again．
　　The bachelor gave them an angry look． The aunt saw him． He's a hard， unkind man， she thought． He doesn't like children． She searched for a suitable answer to Cyril's question， but could not find one．
　　The smaller girl began to say some words from a song：
　　'On the road to Mandalay， where the happy children play，'she began．
　　Then she stopped． She could not remember any more words， so she said the first words again， quietly but very clearly． Then she said them again． And again． And again．
　　The bachelor looked angrily at the girl， and then at the aunt．
　　'Come here and sit down quietly，'the aunt said quickly to the children．'I'm going to tell you a story．'
　　The children moved slowly towards the aunt's seat． They already looked bored． Clearly， the aunt was not a famous story-teller．
　　The story was horribly uninteresting． It was about a little girl． She was not a beautiful child， but she was always very，very good．Everybody loved her because she was good．Finally， she fell into a lake and her friends saved her because she was so good， and they loved her so much．
　　'Did they only save her because she was good？' asked the bigger girl．Shouldn't we save bad people too， if they fall in to a lake？'The bachelor wanted to ask the same question， but he said nothing．
　　'Well， yes， we should，' said the aunt．'But I'm sure the little girl's friends ran specially fast because they loved her so much．'
　　'That was the stupidest story that I've ever heard，'said the bigger girl．
　　'I didn't listen after the first few words，' said Cyril，'because it was so stupid．'
　　The smaller girl was already quietly repeating the words of her song for the twentieth time．
　　'You're not very successful as a story-teller，' the bachelor said suddenly from his corner．
　　The aunt looked at him in angry surprise．'It's not easy to tell stories that children can understand，' she answered coldly．
　　'I don't agree with you，' said the bachelor．
　　'Perhaps you would like to tell them a story，'said the aunt． She gave him a cold little smile．
　　'Yes— tell us a story，' said the bigger girl．
　　'A long time ago，'began the bachelor，'there was a little girl called Bertha， who was extraordinarily good． She always worked well at school． She always obeyed her teachers and her parents． She was never late， never dirty， and always ate all her vegetables． She was polite， she was tidy， and she never， never told lies．'
　　'Oh，' said the children． They were beginning to look bored already．
　　'Was she pretty？' asked the smaller girl．
　　' No，' said the bachelor． 'She wasn't pretty． But she was horribly good．'
　　'Horribly good． I like that！' said Cyril． The children began to look more interested． The words 'horrible' and 'good'together was a new idea for them， and it pleased them．
　　'Bertha was always good，'continued the bachelor．'Because she was so good， Bertha had three medals． There was the “Never Late” medal． There was the “Politeness” medal．And there was the medal for the “Best Child in the World”．They were very large medals． Bertha always wore them on her dress， and they clinked as she walked along． She was the only child in her town who had three medals．So everybody knew that she must be an extra good child．'
　　'Horribly good，' repeated Cyril happily．
　　'Everybody talked about Bertha's goodness． The king of that country heard about her， and he was very pleased．“Because Bertha is so good，”he said，“she may come and walk in my palace gardens every Friday afternoon．”The king's gardens were famous． They were large and very beautiful， and children were usually forbidden to go in them．'
　　'Were there any sheep in the palace gardens？' asked Cyril．
　　'No，' said the bachelor，'there were no sheep．'
　　'Why weren't there any sheep？'asked Cyril at once．
　　The aunt gave a little smile， and waited with interest for the bachelor's answer．
　　'There were no sheep in the king's gardens，' explained the bachelor， 'because the king's mother had once had a dream． In her dream a voice said to her，“Your son will be killed by a sheep，or by a clock falling on him．” Thst is why the king never kept a sheep in his gardens or a clock in his palace．'
　　The aunt thought secretly that this was a very clever answer， but she stayed silent．
　　'Was the king killed by a sheep， or by a clock？ asked the bigger girl．
　　'He is still alive，' said the bachelor calmly，'so we don't know if the dream was true or not． But， although there were no sheep， there were lots of little pigs running around everywhere．'
　　'What colour were the pigs？ asked the smaller glrl．
　　'Black with white faces， white with black faces， all balck， grey and white， and some were all white．'
　　The bachelor stopped for a moment， while the children's imaginations took in these wonderful pictures． Then he went on again．
　　'Bertha was sorry that there were no flowers in the palace gardens． She had promised her aunts that she would not pick any of the kind king's flowers． She wanted very much to be good and to keep her promise． So she was very cross when she found that there were no flowers to pick．'
　　'Why weren't there any flowers？'
　　'Because the pigs had eaten them all，' said the bachelor immediately．' The gardeners had told the king that he couldn't have pigs and flowers， because pigs eat flowers． So the king decided to have pigs，and no flowers．'
　　The children thought that this was an excellent idea．
　　'Most people choose flowers，' said Cyril． He looked very pleased．'But of course， pigs are much better than flowers．'
　　'There were lots of other wonderful things in the palace gardens，'the bachelor continued． 'There were lakes with gold and blue and green fish in them． There were trees with beautiful birds that could talk and say clever things．There were also birds that could sing popular songs．
　　'Well， on the first Friday afternoon in May， Bertha came to the king's gardens， the king's soldiers saw her beautiful white dress and her three medals for goodness， and they opened the doors to the gardens at once．
　　'Bertha walked up and down and enjoyed herself very much． As she walked along， the three medals on her beautiful white dress clinked against each other． She heard them clinking， and she thought：“I'm here in these lovely gardens because I am the Best Child in the World．”She felt pleased and happy and very， very good．
　　'Just then a very big， hungry wolf came into the gardens． It wanted to catch a fat little pig for its supper．'
　　'What colour was the wolf？ asked the children， who were listening to the story with great interest．
　　'He was grey，'said the bachelor，'with a black tongue and angrg yellow eges． He had long black claws and big，strong， yellowish teeth． The wolf was hungry． He smelled the ground with his long grey nose． Then he saw Bertha's beautiful， clean white dress and began to move quietly towards her．
　　'Bertha saw the wolf and she wished she had not come to the gardens．Oh， why did I come here？”she thought．“All the bad children are safe at home． I wish I wasn't an extraordinarily good child！ Then I could be safe at home too．”She ran as hard as she could， and the wolf came after her on his long grey legs．
　　'At last Bertha mannged to reach some big， sweet smelling myrtle bushes， and she hid herself in the thickest bush． The wolf walked round and round the bushes， with his angry yellow eyes and his long blach tongue． But he couldn't see Bertha because the bushes were too thick， and he couldn't smell her because the smell of the myrtle was too strong． So after a while the wolf became bored， and decided to go and catch a little pig for his supper．
　　'Bertha was terribly frightened． Her heart beat very fast and her body shook with fear． Her arms shook and her legs shook． Her three medals for goodness shook too． And as they shook， they clinked together． The wolf was just moving away， when he heard the medals clinking， and he stopped to listen． The medals clinked again． The wolf's yellow eyes shone， and he ran into the myrtle bushes， pulled Bertha out，and ate her． He ate everything except her shoes， a few small pieces of her dress， and the three medals for goodness．'
　　'Were any of the little pigs killed？' asked Cyril．
　　'No， they all escaped．'
　　'The story began badly，' said the smaller girl，'but it finished beautifully．'
　　'It is the most beautiful story that I have ever heard，'said the bigger girl．
　　'It is the only beautiful story I have ever heard，' said Cyril．
　　The aunt did not agree．'It was a most improper story！'she said angrily．'You mustn't tell children stories like that！You have destroyed years of careful teaching．'
　　'Well，' said the bachelor． He put on his coat and picked up his bags．'The children sat still and were quiet for ten minutes while they listened to the story． And they didn't do that for you．'
　　'I feel sorry for that woman，' thought the bachelor as he stepped down from the train at the next station．'What will people think when those children ask her for an improper story！'






■ Gabriel Ernest
　　Cunningham had spent an agreeable week in the country with his friend Van Cheele． Now Van Cheele was driving his guest back to the station． Cunningham was unusually quiet on the journey， but Van Cheele talked all the time， so he did not notice his friend's silence．
　　Suddenly Cunningham spoke．'There is a wild animal in your woods，' he said．
　　'A wild animal？ A few rabbits， perhaps． Nothing very terrible， surely，' said Van Cheele． Cunningham said nothing．
　　' What did you mean about a wild animal？' asked Van Cheele later， at the station．
　　'Nothing． It was my imagination． Here is the train，'said Cunningham．
　　That afternoon Van Cheele went for a walk through his woods． He knew a little about plants and animals， and he enjoyed walking through the woods around his house and looking at the birds and flowers there． He also enjoyed telling everyone about them aftefwards．Of course，he never saw anything very surprising——until that afternoon．
　　During his walk Van Cheele came to a deep pool under some tall trees． He knew it well： after all， it was his pool．But today， he saw a boy of about sixteen lying on a large rock beside the pool． The boy was drying his wet， naked brown body in the sun． His hair was wet too， and he had long， golden，wolfish eyes． He turned those eyes towards Van Cheele with a look of lazy watchfulness．
　　Van Cheele was surprised to see the boy． Where does this wild－looking boy come from？ he thought． Can he be the miller's son？ He disappeared two months ago． People say he fell into the river． It's a fast-running river， and nobody ever found his body． I wonder？ But the miller's boy was only a young child…
　　'What are you doing here？asked Van Cheele．
　　'Enjoying the sunshine， of course，' said the boy．
　　'Where do you live？'
　　'Here， in these woods．'
　　'You can't live in these woods．' said Van Cheele．
　　'They are very nice woods，' said the boy politely．
　　'But where do you sleep at night？'
　　'I don't sleep at night． That's my busiest time．'
　　Van Cheele began to feel cross． What did the boy mean？
　　'What do you eat？ he asked．
　　'Meat，' said the boy． He opened his mouth， showing very white teeth．
　　'Meat？What kind of meat？
　　'Well， if you must know， I eat rabbits， wild birds，chickens from the farm and young sheep from the hills． I like children when I can find them． But they 're usually too well locked in at night． It's two months since I tasted child meat．'
　　The boy is joking about the children， thought Van Cheele． But perhaps he really is stealing animals from the woods and farms． I must find out more about this．
　　Aloud he said，'You catch rabbits？ You must be joking．Our rabbits are much too fast for you．'
　　'At night I hunt on four feet，' was the boy's surprising replp．
　　'You mean that you hunt with a dog？' guessed Van Cheele．
　　The boy sat up suddenly and laughed a strange， low laugh． To Van Cheele that laugh sounded horrlbly like a growl．
　　'I don't think any dog would like to hunt with me，' the boy said．'Not at night…'
　　There is something horrible about this boy， thought Van Cheele． I don't like the way he looks and I don't like the way he talks．
　　'I can't let you stay in my woods，' he said aloud．
　　'Very well then— shall I come and live in your house？'replied te boy．
　　Van Cheele thought about his quiet， tidy house． No， he did not want this strange， wild boy at all． Of course， the boy was joking…but Van Cheele was not amused．
　　'If you don't go away，' he said， 'I shall have to call the police．'
　　At once the boy turned and jumped head-first into the pool． A moment later， his shining， wet body landed half－way up the grassy bank where Van Cheele was standing． Van Cheele stepped backwards． His foot slipped on the wet grass and he fell． He found himself lying on the grass with those wolfish yellow eyes uncomfortably near to his． He felt a moment of horrible fear． The boy laughed again， a laugh that was like the growl of a wild animal， then disaggeared among the bushes．
　　'What an extraordinarily wild animal！' said Van Cheele as he picked himself up． And then he remembered Cunning ham's words about a wild animal in his woods．
　　As he walked slowly home， Van Cheele thought about several things which had happened in and around the village recently． Perhaps this boy knows something about them， he thought…Something has been killing rabbits and birds in the woods lately． Something has been stealing the farmer's chickens and carrying off the young sheep from the hills． Is it possible that this wild boy is hunting at night with a fast， intelligent dog？The boy talked of hunting on four feet at night…But he also said that dogs did not like to hunt with him at night…Very strange indeed．
　　As Van Cheele walked along， he turned the questions over and over in his head． Suddenly he stopped． The miller's son！ he said to himself． The child disappeared two months ago． Everyone thought that he had fallen into the river and been carried away． But the child's mother did not believe this． She said she had heard a scream—— and the scream came from the hill，a long way away from the water．
　　It's impossible， of course， said Van Cheele to himself．But the child disappeared two months ago， and the boy talked about child meat． He was joking， of course…but what a horrible joke！
　　Van Cheele usually talked to his aunt about the birds，plants and animals he saw on his walks． But today he said nothing． He was an important man in his village． If there was a thief living in his woods， he did not want anyone to know．If people hear about the boy， he thought， perhaps they will want me to pay for their lost chickens and their disappearing sheep．
　　He was unusually quiet at dinner．'What's the matter with you？'joked his aunt．'Did you see a wolf on your walk？'
　　At breakfast the next morning Van Cheele realized that he still felt uncomfortable about yesterday's adventure． I know what I' 11 do， he said to himself． I' 11 take the train to London and I'11 go and see Cunningham． I'11 ask him If he was joking when he said there was a wild animal in my woods．
　　After he had decided this，Van Cheele felt better．He sang a happy little song as he walked to the sitting-room for his morning cigarette．His fat old dog walked beside him．
　　As Van Cheele entered the sitting-room， the song died on his lips and his dog ran away with his tail between his legs．There on the day－bed， with his hands comfortably behind his head， lay the boy from the woods． He was drier than yesterday， but he was still naked．
　　'What are you doing here？ asked Van Cheele angrily．
　　'You told me I couldn't stay in the woods，'said the boy calmly．
　　'But I didn't tell you to come here． What if my aunt sees you？ What will she think？'
　　Van Cheele hurriedly covered his unwanted guest's nakedness with a newspaper． At that moment his aunt entered the room．
　　'This is a poor boy，' explained Van Cheele quickly．'He has lost his way—and lost his memory too． He doesn't know who he is， or where he comes from．'
　　Miss Van Cheele was very interested．'Perhaps his name is on his underclothes，' she said．
　　'He has lost his underclothes too，' said Van Cheele． The newspaper was slipping off the boy's naked body． Van Cheele hurried to replace it．
　　Miss Van Cheele was a kind old lady． She felt sorry for this naked， helpless child．
　　'We must help him，' she said． She sent the housekeeper to a neighbour's house to borrow some clothes．
　　Soon the boy was clean and tidy， and dressed in shirt，trousers and shoes． Van Cheele thought he looked just as strange and wolfish as before． But Miss Van Chee1e thought he was sweet．
　　'We must give him a name until we know who he really is，' she said．' Gabriel Ernest， I think． Those are nice， suitable names．'
　　Van Cheele agreed． But he was not sure that the boy was a nice， suitable boy． Van Cheele's old dog， when he saw the boy， had run away in fear and would not come back into the house． Van Cheele decided to go and see Cunningham at once．
　　As he got ready to go to the station， his aunt was busily arranging a children's tea party in the church hall．
　　'Gabriel Ernest will help me with the little ones，' she said happily．
　　When Van Cheele got to London， Cunningham did not want to talk at first．You'll think I'm crazy，' he said．
　　'But what did you see？' asked Van Cheele．
　　'I saw something—something unbelievable． On the last evening of my visit to you I was standing half-hidden in the bushes， watching the sun go down． Suddenly I noticed a naked boy． He has been swimming in a pool somewhere， I said to myself． He was standing on the hillside and he too was watching the sun go down． Then the sun disappeared behind the hill and its light was gone． At the same moment a very surprising thing happened—the boy disappeared too．'
　　'What？He disappeared just like that？' said Van Cheele excitedly．
　　'No． It was much more horrible than that． On the open hillside where the boy had been，I saw a large，blackish-grey wolf with long white teeth and yellow eyes． You' ll think I'm crazy—'
　　But Van Cheele did not wait． He was running towards the station as fast as he could． He did not know what he could do． I can't send my aunt a message， he thought．What can I say？ Gabriel Ernest is a werewolf'？ My aunt will think I'm joking． I MUST get home before sundown．
　　He caught his train． With painful slowness it carried him to the station a few miles from his home． He took a taxi to his village．
　　'Take me to the church hall— and hurry！ 'he ordered．The taxi drove along the quiet country roads， and the sky turned pink and purple as the sun got lower and lower in the west．
　　His aunt was putting away some uneaten cakes and sand wiches when he arrived．
　　'Where is Gabriel Ernest？' screamed Van Cheele．
　　'He's taking little Jack Toop home，' said his aunt calmly．'It was getting so late． I didn't want to send the dear little boy home alone． Isn't the sky beautiful this evening？'
　　But Van Cheele had no time to talk about the beautiful sky． He ran like the wind down the narrow road that went to the Toops' house． On one side was the fast-running river， on the other was the dark hillside． In a minute I'll catch up with them，Van Cheele thought．
　　Then the sun went down behind the hill and the whole world became grey and cold．Van Cheele heard a short scream of fear， and he knew he was too late．
　　Nobody ever saw litele Jack Toop or Gabrid Ernest again．Gabriel Ernest's clothes were found lying in the road．
　　'Poor littler Jack fell into the river，' said Miss Van Cheele．'And dear Gabriel Ernest took off his clothes and jumped into the river to try to save him．'
　　Mrs Toop had eleven other children and did not cry too long for her lost son． But Miss Van Cheele was terribly sad about Gabriel Ernest．
　　'He must have a memorial in the church，' she said． She chose the words herself：
　　GABRIEL ERNEST，AN UNKNOWN BOY
　　WHO BRAVELY GAVE HIS LIFE
　　FOR ANOTHER．
　　Van Cheele usually did what his aunt wanted． But he refused to give any money at all for Gabriel Ernest's memorial．






■ Tobermory
　　I t was a cold，rain－washed afternoon in late August．Lady Blemley and her guests were sitting round the teatable．Everyone was listening open－mouthed to Mr Cornelius Appin.
　　Although he was one of her guests，Lady Blemley did notknow Mr Appin well．She had invited him to stay at Blemley House because she had heard that he was clever．But until teatime that day he had not done or said anything clever．Hedid not play tennis，or sing，or make intelligent conversation．But now Mr Appin was describing a most extraordinary discovery and the other guests were listening with deep interest．'Are you telling us that you have found a way of teachinganimals to talk？'Sir Wilfrid was saying．'And our dear oldTobermory is your first successful student？'
　　'I have studied this problem for seventeen years，'saidMr Appin，'but I didn't have any real success until eight ornine months ago． Of course， I have studied thousands of animals，but recently I have worked only with cats．A cat，of course，is a wild animal who agrees to live with you．All catsare intelligent，but naturally some cats are more intelligent than others．When I met Tobermory a week ago，I realized at once that here was an extraordinarily intelligent cat，a veryspecial cat indeed．In Tobermory，I found the student I needed．With him I have succeeded in my plan．'
　　Nobody laughed，and nobody actually said'Rubbish'，al-though Clovis's lips moved silently…
　　'And have you really taught Tobermory，'asked MissResker，'to say and understand short，easy words？'
　　'My dear Miss Resker，'said Mr Appin patiently，'weteach little children and very slow，stupid adults in that way．But Tobermory is a most intelligent cat．He can speak Englishas well as you or I can．'
　　This time Clovis said'Rubbish！'aloud．
　　Sir Wilfrid was more polite，but it was clear that he didnot believe Mr Appin's story．
　　'Shall we bring the cat in here and hear him forourselves？'said Lady Blemley．
　　Sir Wilfrid went off to look for Tobermory．
　　'Mr Appin will try to be clever，'said Miss Resker happily，'but if we watch him carefully，we shall see his lips move．'
　　In a minute Sir Wiflrid returned， looking very excited．
　　'It's true，you know！'he said．'I found Tobermory sleeping in the smoking-room，and called out to him to come for his tea．He lifted his head and opened one eye．I said，“Come on，Toby，don't keep us waiting！”and he said calmly，“I'll come when I'm ready！”I couldn't believe my ears！'
　　The guests all started talking at once，while Mr Appin satsilently and looked very pleased with himself indeed．
　　Then Tobermory entered the room and calmly walkedover to the tea table． The conversation stopped．Nobody knewwhat to say to a talking cat．At last Lady Blemley spoke：
　　'Would you like some milk，Tobermory？'she asked in ahigh，unnatural voice．
　　'I don't mind if I do，'answered Tobermory．Lady Blemley's hand shook with excitement and some of the milkwent onto the carpet．
　　'Oh dear！I'm so sorry，'she said．
　　'I don't mind．It isn't my carpet，after all，'replied To－bermory.
　　There was another silence，then Miss Resker asked politely，'Did you find it difficult to learn English，Tobermory？'
　　Tobermory looked straight through her with his brightgreen eyes．Clearly，he did not answer questions that did notinterest him．
　　'What do you think of the intelligence of people？'askedMavis Pellington．
　　'Which people's intelligence？'asked Tobermory coldly.
　　'Well，my intelligence，for example，'said Mavis with alittle laugh．
　　'You make things very uncomfortable for me，'said Tobermory，although he did not look at all uncomfortable.'WhenLady Blemley wanted to invite you here，Sir Wilfrid was notpleased．“Mavis Pellington is the stupidest woman I know，”he said．“That's why I want to invite her，”Lady Blemleyreplied．“I want her to buy my old car， and she's stupidenough to do that．”'
　　'It isn't true！'cried Lady Blemley．'Don't believe him，Mavis！'
　　'If it isn't true，'said Mavis coldly，'why did you saythis morning that your car would be just right for me？'
　　Major Barfield did his best to help．He tried to start anew conversation．'How are you getting on with your littleblack and white lady friend in the garden？'he asked Tobermory.
　　Everybody realized at once that this was a mistake．
　　Tobermory gave him an icy look．'We do not usually discuss these things in polite company，'he said．'But I havewatched you a little since you have been in this house．I thinkperhaps you would not like me to discuss your lady friends.'
　　The Major's face became very red，and all the otherguests began to look worried and uncomfortable．What was Tobermory going to say next？
　　'Would you like to go down to the kitchen now，Tobermory，'asked Lady Blemley politely，'and see if the cook hasgot your dinner ready？'
　　'No，thank you，'said Tobermory．'I 've only just hadmy tea．I don't want to make myself sick．'
　　'Cats have nine lives，you know，'said Sir Wilfrid with alaugh．
　　'Possibly，'answered Tobermory．'But only one stomach．'
　　'Lady Blemley！'cried Mrs Cornett，'Don't send thatcat to the kitchen.He will talk about us to the cook！'
　　Everyone was very worried now．They remembered uncomfortably that Tobermory moved freely all over the houseand gardens，at all hours of the day and night. He could lookinto any of the bedrooms if he wanted to．What had he seen？What had he heard？Nobody's secrets were safe now.
　　'Oh，why did I come here？'cried Agnes Resker，whocould never stay silent for long．
　　'You know very well why you came here，'said Tobermory immediately．'You came for the food，of course．I heardyou talking to Mrs Cornett in the garden．You said that the Blemleys were terribly boring people，but they had an excel-lent cook．'
　　'You mustn't believe him！'cried Agnes．'I never saidthat，did I，Mrs Cornett？'
　　'Later，Mrs Cornett repeated your words to Bertie vanTahn，'said Tobermory．'She said，“That Resker woman willgo anywhere for four good meals a day，”and Bertie said—'
　　Just then Tobermory looked out of the window and sawthe doctor's big yellow cat crossing the garden．Immediatelyhe disappeared through the open window．
　　Everyone started talking at once，and Mr Appin foundhimself in a storm of angry questions．
　　'You must stop this at once，'everyone said to him.'What will happen if Tobermory teaches other cats to talk？We shall never have a moment's peace！'
　　'It's possible that he has taught the gardener's cat，'replied Mr Appin thoughtfully，'but I don't believe he hashad time to teach any other cats．'
　　'Then，'said Mrs Cornett，'although Tobermory is avaluable cat，he and the gardener's cat must die．Don't youagree，Lady Blemley？'
　　'You're right，'said Lady Blemley sadly.'My husbandand I love Tobermory—well，we did before this afternoon—but now，of course，he must die as soon as possible．''We will poison his dinner，'said Sir Wilfrid，'and I willkill the gardener's cat myself．The gardener won't like it，but I'll say it has some kind of disease—'
　　'But what about my discovery？'cried Mr Appin．'What about all my years of work？Are you going to destroy my onlysuccessful student？'
　　'You can go and teach the cows on the farm，'said Mrs Cornett coldly，'or the elephants at the zoo．Elephants arevery intelligent，they tell me，and elephants don't hide behind chairs or under beds and listen to people's conversations．'Mr Appin knew when he was beaten．
　　Dinner that evening was not a success．Sir Wilfrid hadhad a difficult time with the gardener's cat and later with the gardener．Agnes Resker refused to eat anything，while Mavis Pellington ate her meal in silence．Everyone was waiting for Tobermory．A plate of poisoned fish stood ready for him in thedining－room，but he did not come home．Nobody talked much，and nobody laughed．It was a most uncomfortable meal．
　　After dinner the Blemleys and their guests sat in the smoking－room．Everyone was quiet and worried and nobodywanted to play cards．At eleven o'clock the cook and the housekeeper went to bed．They left the kitchen window openfor Tobermory as usual，but he did not come．
　　At two o'clock Clovis spoke：
　　'He won't come home tonight．He's probably in the newspaper office selling them his story．They'll love it．The story will be the excitement of the year．'
　　After that everyone went to bed，but nobody slept．
　　In the morning Tobermory had still not come home．
　　Breakfast was another quiet，uncomfortable meal．Then，half－way through the coffee，the gardener brought in Tobermory's blood-stained body．
　　'Look at his claws！'cried Clovis．'He's been fighting！'And there，on Tobermory's claws，was the yellow hair of the doctor's cat．
　　By lunchtime most of the guests had left Blemley House．Lady Blemley began to feel better．She took out her pen and paper and wrote a very angry letter to the doctor about the death of her valuable cat．
　　Tobermory was Mr Appin's only successful student．Afew weeks after Tobermory's death an elephant escaped from the Dresden Zoo and killed an English visitor．
　　The zoo keeper said that the elephant had always been acalm and gentle animal before．But suddenly it seemed to be－come very angry with the English visitor，who was talking toit．
　　The dead man's name was reported in the newspapers as Oppin，but his first name was Cornelius．
　　'If Appin was trying to teach the poor elephant to speak German，'said Clovis，'I'm not surprised it killed him．'






■ The She-Wolf
　　To Leonard Bilsiter the real world was not very agreeableor interesting．He preferred to live in an 'unseen world'of his imagination．Children are often very good atthis，but they are happy in their own dream worlds and do nottry to make other people believe them． Leonard Bilsiter talked about'the unseen world'to anyone who would listen to him．Nothing very strange happened to Leonard，until one year he travelled by train across Eastern Europe．He had a long conversation with a Russian passenger，who talked about mag－ic and'hidden powers'in a most interesting way．Leonard lis-tened excitedly．He came home with many stories about the strange，dark mysteries which he called Siberian Magic．His aunt，Cecilia Hoops，was deeply interested in Leonard's Siberian Magic．When she told her friends about it（'My dears，he took a garden vegetable and changed it into abird in front of my eyes！'），her friends realized that she also had a wonderful imagination．
　　Leonard，together with his hidden powers，was invited toMary Hampton's house－party．Several other people were alsostaying in the house，and they all had to listen to Leonardtalking about the mysteries of the unseen world．
　　'Do please change me into a wolf，Mr Bilsiter，'said MrsHampton during lunch on the day of his arrival．
　　'My dear Mary，'said her husband．'What a strangeidea！'
　　'A she-wolf，of course，'continued Mrs Hampton．'I don't want to change into a man as well as an animal！'
　　'We should not joke about the unseen world，'saidLeonard．
　　'Oh，I'm not joking，I promise you．But don't changeme into a wolf tonight．I want to play cards，and there are on-ly eight of us in the house today．I've invited some more peo－ple to come here tomorrow．Wait until tomorrow night．'
　　Leonard was not amused．'Mrs Hampton，you reallymust not laugh at these dark mysteries．They can be strongerand more dangerous than we realize．'
　　Clovis Sangrail listened silently to this conversation，andafter lunch he spoke to Lord Pabham in the smoking－room．
　　'Tell me，Lord Pabham，'began Clovis．'Have you got ashe－wolf in your zoo at Pabham Park？A quiet，friendly she－wolf？'
　　'There's Louisa，'said Lord Pabham thoughtfully．'She's very quiet and gentle．Why do you ask？'
　　'I'd like to borrow her tomorrow evening，'said Clovis lightly．'May I，please？'
　　'Tomorrow night？'repeated Lord Pabham in surprise．
　　'Yes．Wolves usually sleep during the day，don't they？So a night-time journey won't hurt her．Could you ask one of your men to bring Louisa here when it is dark？Then he can take her quietly into the conservatory at the same time as MrsHampton leaves the dining－room．'
　　Lord Pabham looked at Clovis in surprise．Then he smiled．'I understand！'he said．'You're going to try a little Siberian Magic．And has Mrs Hampton agreed to help you？''Mary has promised—if your she－wolf is quiet and gen-tle.'
　　'Louisa won't give you any trouble，'said Lord Pabham．The next day several more guests arrived．Leonard Bil-siter enjoyed telling them all about Siberian Magic and hidden powers．He talked all through dinner．When the coffee arrivedat the end of the meal，Leonard's aunt spoke．
　　'Dear Leonard，'she said，'please show us your powers.Change something into another shape．'She turned to the oth－er guests．'He can do it if he wants to，'she told them．'Oh，please show us，'said Mavis Pellington excitedly.'Well…'began Leonard．'If somebody will give me asmall coin…'
　　'Oh，surely you aren't going to do stupid things withdisappearing coins？'said Clovis．'We want to see somethingreally surprising．'
　　'That's right，'said Mary Hampton．'Why don't youchange me into a wolf？ You promised！'She got up from thetable and walked into the conservatory with a bowl of fruit forher macaws．
　　'I have already warned you，'said Leonard seriously.'Itis dangerous to joke about these things.'
　　'I don't believe you can do it！'laughed Mary from theconservatory.As she spoke，she disappeared behind a largegreen plant．
　　'Mrs Hampton—'began Leonard seriously．Then anicy wind seemed to fill the dining-room，and at the same timeMrs Hampton's macaws began to scream．
　　'What's wrong with those stupid birds，Mary？'askedher husband.Just then，a big grey wolf stepped out from be-hind the large green plant．
　　Leonard's aunt saw it first．'Leonard！'she screamed．'Bring Mrs Hampton back at once！We don't want a danger－ous wild animal in here！'
　　'I—I don't know how to bring her back，'said Leonardin a small，frightened voice．
　　'Rubbish！'shouted Mr Hampton．'You changed my dear wife into a wolf. Now you must bring her back again！'
　　'Please believe me，'said Leonard．'I didn't change your wife into a wolf．'
　　'Then where is she，and how did that animal get into the conservatory？'asked Mr Hampton angrily．
　　'Of course，we must believe you when you say that you didn't change Mrs Hampton into a wolf，'said Clovis politely．'But you must agree that it all looks very strange．'
　　'How can you stand there arguing，'cried Mavis Pelling－ton，'with a wild animal in the house？'
　　'Lord Pabham，'began Mr Hampton，'you know a lotabout wild animals…'
　　'I buy all my animals，'said Lord Pabham．'I have nev-er found one in a conservatory before．But this is a wolf，I amsure of that．I think it's probably a North American she－wolf_'
　　'Oh，who cares where it came from！'screamed Mavis，as the wolf came a few steps further into the room．'Can't you offer it some food，and take it away safely somewhere be－fore it bites somebody？'
　　'If this animal is really Mrs Hampton，'said Clovis，'she's just had an excellent dinner. She won't be interested infood．'
　　'Oh，Leonard，'cried his aunt，'can't you use your wonderful powers to change this terrible animal into something small and gentle，like a rabbit？'
　　'I don't think Mr Hampton would like that，'said Clovis．
　　'You're right！'shouted Mr Hampton．'I forbid it！'
　　'All my wolves love sugar，'said Lord Pabham．'If youlike，I'll offer this one a piece．'He took a piece of sugar fromthe table and pushed it along the floor towards Louisa．She ateit quickly and then，clearly hoping for more sugar，she fol－lowed Lord Pabham out of the room．
　　The guests left the table thankfully and hurried into the conservatory．It was empty．Mrs Hampton had disappeared．
　　'The door to the garden is locked on the inside！'saidClovis．（He had quickly turned the key while he was pretend－ing to try the lock．）
　　Everyone turned towards Leonard Bilsiter．
　　'If you have not changed my wife into a wolf，'said MrHampton，'will you please explain where she has gone？ Clear-ly she could not go out through a locked door—so where isshe？'
　　'I tell you，I had nothing to do with it！'repeatedLeonard again and again．But nobody believed him．
　　'I'm leaving，'said Mavis Pellington．'I refuse to stayanother hour in this house．'
　　Just then Mary Hampton entered the room．
　　'What happened？'she asked crossly．'Someone has beenplaying a stupid game with me．I found myself in the kitchen，eating sugar from Lord Pabham's hand．I hate stupid games，and my doctor has forbidden me to eat sugar．'
　　'Well，my dear…'began Mr Hampton．Mrs Hamptonlistened excitedly as he explained．
　　'So you really did change me into a wolf，Mr Bilsiter？'cried Mrs Hampton．
　　'No，no，'said Leonard．'It's all a mistake．' 'Actually，I did it，'said Clovis．'You see，I spent two years in Russia，and I know a little about Siberian Magic．Of course，I don't like to talk about it．But when other people talk a lot of rubbish about hidden powers，I like to show what Siberian Magic can really do… May I please have a drink？Ifeel a little tired now．'
　　Leonard Bilsiter looked at Clovis with hate in his eyes．At that moment he wished strongly that he could change Clovisin to some small helpless animal，and then step on him very hard．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Star Zoo by Harry Gilbert





■ 1 You must marry me
　　Nothing ever happens on Just Like Home—that's the name of the planet I live on．I get so bored！
　　But tonight was Remembering Night and that's exciting．There's the big fire where everybody must put on something that they love and watch it burn．Then there's the dancing round the fire．
　　But what I like best about Remembering Night are the clothes．We usually wear what we like on Just Like Home—but the clothes must have the name of our name-animal on them．For example，I always have the word'Hummingbird'on my clothes，which means my name is Hummingbird—Hummy for short．
　　Nobody knows what a hummingbird looks like，but we know what birds are．Birds are animals that fly．The Book of Remembering tells us that．
　　I don't always believe what the Book of Remembering says．
　　Nobody knows who you are on Remembering Night because you wear black clothes that cover you from head to foot，and there is no name of your name-animal．You can only see people's eyes looking out of the eye-holes in the clothes．
　　It was dark outside．The only light came from the big fire．I beld my father's hand at first and we danced together．My mother danced away and I couldn't see her．Soon I lost my father．I didn't know where they were．
　　It didn't matter．I was dancing in the middle of the crowd．Our family would meet together in the robot plane afterwards．
　　There were about a thousand people round the fire．Too many people to count．Nearly everybody on Just Like Home was there．
　　Everybody，on planets all over the Galaxy，was dancing round fires at the same time．What a wonderful thing！
　　The last dance began．You hold hands in a big circle round the fire—everybody together．You dance round and round in a circle until…
　　Well，everybody knows what happens in the end．
　　I was holding hands with someone on my right and someone on my left．We were all shouting，'BURN BURN BURN BURN BURN BURN BURN…'
　　The last dance went on for a long time．In the end somebody fell down．He pulled down the people on both sides of him．Then people on both sides of them fell down．Everybody was too tired to stay on their feet．
　　People fell down all round the circle．Falling．Dying．
　　We wear black clothes to remember．We remember the Burning．
　　We remember that we have a Galaxy，but we are alone．We are empty in our hearts．We are the only living things in the Galaxy．
　　Sad．Lonely and sad．
　　I lay on the ground，very，very tired．I was happy and sad at the same time．Happy to be with everybody，sad that we were alone．
　　Then the worst thing in my life happened．Somebody came up to me and said，'Hello．'I didn't know who it was．I could only see his eyes shining in the light of the fire．But it was the voice of a man who was much older than me．
　　'Hello？'I answered．I didn't want to talk to him．
　　'I saw you in the dance，'he said．'I know you're a young girl because you were dancing like a young girl．I think you're seventeen years old．'
　　'No，I'm only sixteen，'I said．
　　'Wonderful．Just what I want，'said the man．'I will marry you．You must marry me．'
　　I couldn't believe what he was saying．This was terrible．And very bad luck．
　　Yes，it was true a woman must marry any man who asks her on Remembering Night—by order of the Star Council．I'm sixteen so I'm a woman，not a child．I couldn't say no to this man．I was sick in my heart．
　　'My name's Buff，'the man said．'What's your name，sweetheart？'
　　'Er，my name's，er…Caterpillar，'I lied．'I'm usually called Kate．'
　　'Well，Kate，'Buff said，'will you marry me？'
　　'I'm sorry，Buff．I know I'm sixteen and old enough to get married but my parents don't want me to get married yet．I'm their only daughter．'
　　Buff laughed．It was a horrible Iaugh．He enjoyed knowing I didn't want him．What a monster！
　　Oh，thank Earth－and－animals I hadn't told him my real name！
　　I jumped up suddenly and ran into the crowds of people in the dark．I was safe．He couldn't find me．I went to our robot plane and sat inside until my parents came．
　　I didn't tell my parents anything．I was afraid．The Star Council said Buff was right and I was wrong，and I didn't know what my parents would do．
　　Next morning I forgot about it．How could Buff find me？There were hundreds of girls on our planet．He didn't know my name．He had only seen my eyes．
　　Suddenly my father came into my room．'Hummingbird，'he said sadly．
　　'What's the matter？'I asked．'Why are you calling me Hummingbird，not Hummy？'
　　'Hummingbird，ask your robot for a wedding dress．'
　　'Why？Why？'But I knew the answer．
　　'You will marry a gentleman called Buffalo．'
　　'No，father，I can't．'I started crying．'I don't want to．I'm too young．I don't want to leave you．I hate him！'
　　My father shook his head．'Please，Hummy，it's only for one year．You can't be a child forever．Lots of girls don't want to get married at first．The Star Council says we must get married as often as possible and have children．You know why．'
　　'Why？'I spoke like a small child．
　　'Because we are lonely．Because there is nothing in the Galaxy except us．You know all that，Hummy．'
　　The dressing-robot made me a wedding dress—we have robots for everything like that．The dress was white and covered me all over except for my eyes．
　　My father took my arm．
　　Buff was waiting with my mother．I saw his eyes through the eye-holes of his wedding suit．They were small mean eyes．
　　'Hello，Kate，'he said．
　　My father said，'Her name is Hummingbird．'
　　'I know，I know，'Buff said．
　　'How did you find me？'I asked Buff．
　　'I had a small camera，'he answered．'I took a photo of your eyes．Did you know that everybody's eyes are different？Nobody has eyes like yours．'
　　I turned to my father．'Listen to him！Can't you see how horrible he is？Please don't make me marry him．'
　　My father didn't say anything．He couldn't help me．
　　You can say no if a man asks you to marry him on Remembering Night．But you must have a very special reason．A reason that the Star Council will accept．If you are doing work that is important for the Galaxy，the Council will usually accept that as a good reason．
　　I couldn't think of anything like that．But it was something to hope for…if I could escape．
　　I was afraid．I didn't want to run away and never see my family again．
　　Some neighbours arrived，and the wedding began immediately．
　　Buff stood next to me and held my hand．His hand was large and a little wet．How I hated him！
　　My father picked up the Book of Remembering．He read，'In the beginning there were millions of planets in the Galaxy but there was only life on one．That was the planet Earth．People and animals lived together．But people polluted Earth．It became too hot for animals to live．They died．All the animals died．So people left Earth and never returned to that planet．Their hearts were empty when they left Earth，empty today，empty forever…'
　　Buff was still holding my hand．
　　My father spoke again．'Buffalo，will you take my daughter Hummingbird to be your wife for one year，in the name of Earth and the animals？'
　　Buff answered，'I will．'
　　My father turned to me．'Hummingbird，will you take this man Buffalo to be your husband for one year，in the name of Earth and the animals？'
　　That's when I ran．
　　I let the wedding dress fall off me．I ran fast．They ran afterme but I could run much faster without the wedding dress．I got to our robot spaceship，jumped into it and said，'Take off．'
　　'Why are people running towards us？'the spaceship asked．
　　'Take off now！'I shouted．'It's life or death！'
　　The spaceship couldn't argue．It took off．
　　Just Like Home was green all over—fields of wheat everywhere．I was out in space looking back at my planet．All around me were stars．
　　The millions of stars in the Galaxy—that's where I could hide！






■ 2 A spaceship made of plastic
　　I couldn't believe what I'd done．I'd run away—me！
　　I'm not very brave and I love my parents very much．I never thought I could ever disobey them．
　　I was afraid．And I felt sad for my parents．Poor mother and father！
　　But I had to live my own life．I couldn't get married to a horrible old man like Buffalo！
　　I knew they would follow me quickly so I told the spaceship to take me to a very quiet part of the Galaxy，a long way from any planets with people on．
　　The spaceship went．
　　How can a spaceship travel across the Galaxy in no time at all？
　　Well，I learnt the answer to that in school．There are a lot of little black holes in space．They are about as big as a potato．A spaceship goes into one black hole and comes out of another black hole on the other side of the Galaxy．
　　Don't ask me how a big thing like a spaceship can go into a thing as small as a potato．I was probably asleep when the robot teacher told me the answer to that！
　　Nobody could find me now．I was in the middle of the Galaxy in empty space．
　　There were stars above my head，stars below my feet，starson my left hand，stars on my right hand．
　　Strange．I knew all these stars were a long，long way away but they didn't look far away．They looked very close；I wanted to reach out my hand and touch them．
　　And the silence．So very，very， very quiet．
　　The Book of Remembering says how I felt：'Their hearts were empty．'
　　My heart was empty．I saw millions of stars but there was no life in the Galaxy except us humans．Well，there are potatoes and wheat and rice but you can't talk to vegetables．
　　We are alone．
　　The Book of Remembering says we did it．We polluted Earth and so killed all the animals． We ran away from Earth and we're still running．That was twenty thousand years ago and we still can't forget．
　　The Book of Remembering gives names for thousands of animals．Fantastic！Could there really be thousands of animals？The idea of animals is so strange．What did they look like？The Book of Remembering has no pictures， but says there are birds that fly，and fish that swim．There are animals with no legs，and animals with lots of legs—ugh！What a horrible idea！
　　Can anybody believe stories like that？
　　And now I was running away too．Perhaps I was wrong to run away．
　　Suddenly the spaceship went'PING！'
　　'Yes，what is it？'I asked．
　　'There is something near us．'
　　'Oh！'I said．'I thought we were a long way from anything out here．Take me closer．'
　　We moved closer，but I couldn't see anything．
　　Then one star disappeared，then another star，and another．It was too dark to see what the thing was．It was just a big black shape between me and the stars．
　　It was probably just a big old rock，which had broken off a moon or a planet．
　　Well，perhaps it contained gold or something．Then I could show the Star Council I was doing important work．Perhaps that would be a good reason not to marry Buff．
　　I said，'Find out what it is made of．'
　　The spaceship shot a laser at the thing and said，'It is not natural．It may be a spaceship，although it is moving too slowly to arrive at a star．It is made of plastic．'
　　A spaceship made of plastic？ You can't make spaceships out of plastic！And spaceships don't travel slowly．
　　I was a little afraid，but this was something really important；nobody could make me get married after I had discovered something as strange as this．I was afraid but also excited．Most girls just get married once a year and have another baby．That's enough excitement for them．Not me！
　　I was going to visit this spaceship and meet…the people inside it．
　　'Show me this plastic spaceship，'I said．
　　My spaceship shone out light．The thing was big，big，BIG．Who would build a spaceship so big？ The plastic was full of holes and the spaceship looked old and dead．Would anybody be left alive inside？ I didn't think so．
　　The spaceship was round like a ball．It turned slowly，which made things inside just heavy enough to stay on the ground．
　　I saw a door on it and said，'Land there．'
　　My spaceship landed．I put on a spacesuit， went outside and moved to the big round door．I pulled and pushed and hit it．At last something moved and the door opened．
　　Inside，there was a tunnel．A long black tunnel．I climbed in and the door closed behind me．






■ 3 Monsters
　　There was a door at the other end of the tunnel．I went through and…
　　I was dreaming！I saw big things that grew out of the ground．They were much taller than me with long brown arms covered with green leaves．
　　I was very frightened as I remembered something in the Book of Remembering：'In those days there were trees…'
　　Trees！
　　I never thought a living thing could be so big．I covered my eyes with my hands．I was afraid to look…but I was afraid not to look．
　　After a time I took my hands away from my eyes．The trees were still there．They weren't moving．
　　I suddenly understood that the trees couldn't move．They were plants，like potatoes or rice．I was safe standing under them．
　　But I didn't feel safe．
　　The computer inside my spacesuit was checking the air for me．After a few seconds the red lights on my suit turned to green．The air here was safe for humans．So I took off my spacesuit．
　　Now I could touch and smell things．There was a soft wind．It was cool．I smelt…strange new smells．I smelt living things．Was I smelling the trees…or something else？
　　I heard a sound of crying．Then I thought I heard something moving in the trees—just behind one big tree．
　　Was something hiding behind the tree？I was frightened but I wanted to see，so I walked slowly towards the tree．
　　There was light in this place but there were shadows in the trees．I looked round the tree…
　　I was frightened almost out of my mind．I fell down and my body started shaking．
　　A grey thing came out from behind the tree and came towards me． It was big but it wasn't tall because it walked on four feet．It had no hands．
　　But the thing had teeth．Yes，it had a mouth full of teeth，yellow， shiny teeth． It had yellow eyes and grey hair all over its body．I could smell it…
　　Its mouth came towards my face．I closed my eyes and waited to die．
　　There was hot air on my face．I wanted to scream and scream but I was too frightened．I couldn't scream．
　　My mind exploded．I went crazy．I suddenly hit the grey thing and it fell back against the tree．I hit it again，as hard as I could．
　　I wanted to destroy the grey thing and I was screaming．Suddenly it was gone．
　　Then I saw another monster．This one was very small with grey fur all over its body． It was holding on to the tree but I pulled it off．I could destroy this one！
　　I pulled its short legs hard．The small monster bit me．Its teeth went right into my finger．The pain was terrible．
　　But my mind was exploding．I wanted to destroy it and I didn't care about the pain．I just wanted to kill it．
　　Then the big grey monster ran back through the trees，jumped at me and knocked me down．As I fell，I dropped the little monster and it escaped．
　　My head banged on a rock and everything went black．






■ 4 More monsters
　　There was a long black nose in front of my face． It was smelling me．
　　At first I couldn't understand what was happening．Then I remembered．The monster with teeth！
　　I tried to hit the nose but my arm didn't move．Something was wrong with me．My body felt empty and I was hot inside，like a fire．My body ached and my skin was wet all over．
　　The big grey monster sat in front of me and it looked at me．
　　Then I saw the small monster too．It was lying on the ground．It was hurt．It was very small，just a little bigger than my hand．It had a beautiful soft tail and it made a sad sound：'Eee-eee！'
　　I felt two different things at the same time．I wanted to destroy it…but I also felt sorry for it．It was feeling pain，like me．
　　I didn't know what to do so I started to cry．
　　The big monster lay down next to me with its fur against my skin．I hated the feeling of its fur but my body couldn't move．
　　The fur made my skin dry and I began to feel better．I suddenly felt very tired and I was soon asleep．
　　I woke up feeling better．I wasn't hot inside and I could move again．
　　The big monster sat down with me．I hit it with my hand but I still wasn't strong．I didn't hurt it．
　　Then the monster opened its mouth and called：'Hoo-woo！'
　　Some time passed．Then more monsters came．More and more．Most of the monsters walked on four legs．A very big one licked me with its tongue．It was a hard tongue，not like my soft tongue．But I felt better afterwards．That monster made a noise like this：'Hee-haw！'
　　There was a very small monster that could fly．It had wings and a long hard mouth．It made a noise like this：'Cheepcheep！'
　　It cleaned my finger where Eee-Eee had bitten me．CheepCheep's hard little mouth was good at that．
　　I must tell the truth．I wanted to take a laser gun and kill all those monsters． They weren't hurting me．They were helping me．They were nice．
　　But something in my mind hated them．I didn't want to have to think about them．
　　But I didn't have a laser gun so I couldn't destroy them．
　　One monster brought me water．Another monster gave me some fruit to eat．A few monsters lay against my body and made me warm．They helped me in many ways but there was something sick in my mind．I still hated them． I will try to explain．For twenty thousand years the Galaxy had belonged to humans．Everything in the Galaxy belonged to us．
　　When a new baby comes into a family，the first child hates the baby．The first child wants to be the most important， and to keep everything for itself．It is afraid the baby will take things away from it．
　　It was like that with me．I wanted to fight these monsters．I didn't want them living with me，in my Galaxy．
　　One day two humans came through the trees．I stood up．I was stronger now．'Oh，thank Earth-and-animals！'I said and ran towards them．
　　The humans looked at me with big round eyes． One human was a man with long hair．He said，'Gug-gug-gug！'
　　Then he went down on the ground on his hands and knees，like a baby．He ran round me，smelling me．
　　The woman said，'Yee-yee-yee！'she jumped up on a branch of a tree．
　　They were humans but they were just like the monsters．They couldn't talk to me．
　　I started to feel miserable．The monsters tried to give me food but I didn't care about eating．
　　The monster that said'Hee-haw！'carried me on its back and we went to a little river．Hee－Haw dropped me into the water．I didn't care if I was clean or dirty，but Hee－Haw kicked water over me and washed me．
　　The big grey monster that said'Hoo-woo！'was worried about me．I didn't eat very much and I didn't wash myself．I just sat．
　　One day Hoo-Woo came with Hee-Haw．Hee-Haw carried me through the trees and the three of us travelled a long way．Finally we came to a high plastic wall．
　　Hoo-Woo pushed open a door in the wall and we went through．On the other side the air was hot and wet and the trees were bigger．There were monsters but they were different．
　　Hee-Haw carried me a long way through this forest．In the end we arrived at another plastic wall where there was another door．
　　Hoo－Woo opened the door and we entered a long tunnel．At the end of the tunnel was another door．At first Hoo-Woo waited outside this door，looking worried．I looked at the door．What was on the other side？Why was Hoo-Woo so worried？In the end he opened the door．
　　I saw a small round room just for a second．Then a terrible bright light came out．After that I couldn't see inside any more；it was too bright．I was very frightened．I felt this fear deep inside me．
　　Hee-Haw's head touched the ground．Hoo－Woo's head touched the ground too．I understood．This was their God！I understood because I felt the same fear as they did．
　　Hoo-Woo pushed me towards the light．






■ 5 Waiting for fifteen thousand years
　　'It's too bright in here，'I said．'I can't see．'
　　The light suddenly wasn't so bright and I could see again．I was in a round room，which was empty except for a large square computer．
　　The computer didn't look like the modern computers we have．
　　'You are't God！'I said．'You're just a computer！Just a strange old computer！'
　　A voice came from it．'Yes，this is computer．Who are you？'
　　Oh，the computer still worked！I was surprised as it looked so very old．It didn't speak in a natural way as modern computers do．
　　'I'm Hummingbird，'I answered．
　　'You are not a hummingbird．Hummingbirds fly in the forests here，in Star Zoo．You are human．You are not a child of Star Zoo．Computer is happy．'
　　I listened but I didn't understand．'Hummingbird'was just my name—and the name of one of the animals in the Book of Remembering．Why was this place called the Star Zoo？What was a 'zoo'？I had so many questions to ask！
　　'Computer，'I said，'where do you come from？I never heard of a spaceship as big as this！You speak my language but it sounds different．Why do Hee-Haw and Hoo-Woo think you're God？'
　　'Who is Hee-Haw？Who is Hoo-Woo？'the computer asked．
　　'The two monsters that brought me here，'I answered．
　　'Yes．Dondey．Wolf．All animals believe computer is God．Computer makes ultrasonic sound．Ultrasonics make fear．'
　　'Animals？'I said slowly．Animals were only a story in the Book of Remembering．There were no animals alive today．What was the computer talking about？'Animals…like EeeEee and Cheep-Cheep？'
　　'Eee－Eee is a squirrel，'the computer said．'Cheep-Cheep is a bird．Animals take care of you．'
　　I was very afraid．Donkey，wolf，squirrel，and bird were all animals named in the Book of Remembering．
　　'Where did these animals come from？'I asked．
　　'Star Zoo came from Earth，'the computer answered．'Star Zoo left Earth．Earth was hot．'
　　I suddenly couldn't stand．I fell down and my mind exploded again．This time I wasn't angry．I was sad，empty，afraid，and a little crazy．This was the Book of Remembering come to life！
　　Earth hot？That was the Burning！We made the Earth too hot and all life except humans died．And we humans did it！
　　'Not necessary to fall down，'the computer said．'Computer is not God．Computer wants to talk to humans．Computer is sad that humans have not spoken for fifteen thousand years．'
　　I stood up slowly．The Book of Remembering was forremembering the animals but they had been dead for twenty thousand years．
　　But the animals were here！Yes，here in the Star Zoo，after travelling between stars for twenty thousand years！
　　'Why did you leave Earth？What happened？'I asked．
　　The computer answered，'Humans polluted Earth．Earth was hot．Animals died．'
　　'Yes，'I said．'I know that．'
　　The computer continued，'Humans made zoo in space．No money．Used plastic bottles．'
　　'What？'I said．I didn't understand．
　　'Collected old plastic bottles．Made zoo with plastic bottles．Cheap．Made big zoo with many rooms．'
　　'Why are there different rooms？'I asked．
　　'Animals and plants live in different ways，'the computer said．'Hot，cold，wet，dry．Impossible to keep all animals and all plants in one room．Need different things．Difficult work to get everything right．Necessary to have big computer．No money．Got old computer from army．'
　　'So that's you？'I said．'You're an old army computer from Earth？'
　　'Computer works and never stops．'
　　'I understand！'I said．'A group of people made this Star Zoo．They knew that Earth was dying．They wanted to save the animals．They sent the Star Zoo away from Earth．'
　　'Star Zoo went，'the computer said．'No money．Went slowly．'
　　'Very slowly，'I agreed．'But What happened to the humans inside the Star Zoo？'
　　'Five thousand years humans gave orders．Computer worked．Computer mended walls．Computer kept Star Zoo alive and safe．Star Zoo worked well．No problems．Humans stopped giving orders．Not necessary to talk． Humans enjoyed eating，playing，sleeping．Computer can do work．For fifteen thousand years computer has worked，thought，learnt，grown．Now you have come．Computer is happy．'
　　I was happy too and I wasn't afraid．It was wonderful news．The Galaxy wasn't empty！Animals could live on all the worlds and all humans could be happy again．
　　Humans were lonely without animals．Humans needed animals．
　　'The animals must leave the Star Zoo，'I said to the computer．'We have planets where they can live．Do you agree？'
　　'Star Zoo is not strong，'the computer said．'Holes in walls lose air and water．Animals need planets．Can have more animals on planets．'
　　'Then I must go home，'I said．'I will come back with spaceships．We will take the animals to different planets．Planets everywhere in the Galaxy．'
　　'Computer will choose planets for different animals，'it said．'First plants will grow．Animals will follow．'
　　'You can tell us what to do，'I said．'This is wonderful．
　　I want to leave now．Is Hee-Haw waiting？'
　　'Donkey waits．'the computer made a noise that was like crying．'Donkey has waited for a few minutes．Computer has waited for fifteen thousand years．You come back．Computer is sad and afraid．'






■ 6 They don't believe me
　　Where was my spacesuit？
　　Eee-Eee found it up in a tree where another squirrel was living in it．Eee-Eee told the squirrel to get out of my spacesuit．
　　I was happy to wear the spacesuit．Hoo-Woo took me to the door where I first came in．
　　Hoo-Woo made his noise：'Hoo-woo！'as I opened the door．He was sad that I was going．
　　I said，'I'm coming back，'and I went out to my spaceship．
　　I got in and said，'Take me home．'
　　The stars changed suddenly．I saw my world in space，all green and beautiful．A few minutes later the spaceship landed and I was home．
　　My father ran from the house shouting，'Hummy！'
　　I kissed my father．
　　My mother was angry with me．'I didn't know if you were dead or alive！'she cried．'It's been a week！'
　　A week！It felt like months to me．
　　'I've got some very exciting news for you，'I said．
　　'OK，'my mother said．'Let's sit in the theat and talk there．Oh yes，'she said to my father，'why don't you go to the house and bring us something to drink？'
　　Strange．Robots usually bring the drinks．But I just thought my mother wanted to be specially nice to me．
　　I told my mother what had happened．When my father came with drinks，I told my story anain．
　　Telling my story，I looked at the green fields of wheat moving in the wind．The wheat went on for thousands of miles，looking just the same everywhere．
　　How different it was in the Star Zoo！Every time you turned your head， you saw something new．That had frightened me at first but now I thought the Star Zoo was wonderful．
　　I explained that feeling to my parents．
　　'Yes，yes，Hummy，'my mother said，looking quickly at my father．
　　I saw a spaceship land near the house．'Who's coming？'I asked．
　　My mother and father looked at each other．Then I knew．
　　'It's Buff，isn't it？'I said．'You called him when you were getting the drinks！'I said to my father．I was really angry．'How could you？Wait！You don't believe me，do you？'
　　'Your head is full of dreams， Hummy，'my father said．'You must be married to Buff，but only for a year．Then you can get married to someone you like．'
　　I jumped up．'I hate you！Why did I come back？Why didn't I go straight to the Star Council？'
　　Buff walked up to us．'Hello again，Kate，'he said．'I still remember the first name you told me．'
　　I had an idea．'Listen to what happened to me，'I said，and Itold my story a third time．
　　Buff laughed．' What a story！You can tell me stories like that every night．'
　　'So you don't believe me？'I smiled．
　　He just laughed．
　　'OK，Buff，'I said．'Come with me．I'll show you the Star Zoo．If it's only a story， I'll marry you． I'll even get married for five years if you want．OK？'
　　'Why not？'Buff said．'I'll bring a robot to see what's really there．Robots never lie．'
　　Buff borrowed one of our family robots and we took off．My father watched us go with a worried face．
　　It was black in the empty space far between stars and we couldn't see anything．Buff was surprised when we landed onthe Star Zoo．
　　We put on spacesuits and went out．Buff looked at the door，very surprised． We went in．
　　After we went through the second door，Buff stood without moving and he looked at the trees and didn't say anything． The robot closed the door behind us．
　　Hoo－Woo ran out of the trees to meet me． I was happy to see him and happy to be back in the Star Zoo again． I wasn't afraid at all．
　　I looked round at Buff and my heart stopped．Buff's face was full of hate and he was holding a laser gun．The gun was pointing at Hoo－Woo．






■ 7 The answer is robots
　　Ipushed Buff as he tried to shoot Hoo-Woo．The laser gun burnt a hole in the plastic wall，but it didn't hit Hoo－Woo．
　　Buff was screaming and the whites of his eyes were showing．He fell on the ground and water ran out of his mouth．He was crazy．I remembered the way I had gone crazy when I first came into the Star Zoo． It was seeing the animals． It was the Book of Remembering coming to life．It made people go crazy．
　　I hid Buff's laser gun and used some long plants to tie him up．Hee-Haw sat on him while I did it．A bell was ringing and all the animals started looking for something．What were they looking for？
　　A bird found it．It was the hole where the laser had burnt through the wall．The Star Zoo was losing air． I could hear the air escaping．
　　It was the computer's job to check for damage like that．Then it rang the bell． But how could the animals mend the hole？
　　Eee－Eee went to a pipe on the wall and waited．Warm wet plastic came out of the end of the pipe．The squirrel held little bits of the plastic and ran quickly up the wall． She put the soft plastic over the hole and ran down to get more plastic from the pipe．
　　In one minute the hole was covered．Eee－Eee went on working until the bell stopped ringing．
　　The computer and the animals worked together to mend the Star Zoo．After fifteen thousand years they were very good at it！
　　Buff had crazy eyes．The animals didn't want to go near him so I took care of him． I hoped he would get better soon．
　　But he didn't get better．Three days later he still wanted to kill and destroy every animal that he saw．He thought I was ananimal too．
　　He never spoke．Perhaps he had forgotten how to speak．Hewouldn't touch food or water．
　　I didn't know what to do． In the end I went to see the computer with Hee－Haw and the robot．
　　There was the same terrible light and the fear．But I knew it was ultrasonics that made me afraid．The robot didn't have any feelings，of course． The robot and I went into the computer room but Hee-Haw stayed outside．
　　The ultrasonics stopped and the light went soft．
　　'Hummingbird，'the computer said．'You have come back．Computer is happy．Who is the other human？'
　　'This isn't a human，'I explained．'This is just a family robot．'
　　'Not human？Looks very human．'
　　'I know，'I said．'But that's not important．Everything's gone crazy！''What is the problem？'the computer asked．
　　I told the computer about visiting my parents and that they didn't believe me．I explained about Buff and said，'But he's gone crazy．I know I went crazy at first but I got better．Buff isn't getting better．'
　　'Why？'the computer said．'You are human．Buff is human．What is different？'
　　'I don't know，'I answered．'I'm younger than Buff．Perhaps people's minds get hard like rock as they get older．They can't change how they think．'
　　'When will Buff get better？'the computer asked．
　　'Never…I think，'I said．'Buff's too old．'
　　There was silence．After a long time the computer said slowly， 'Computer is old．'
　　'Oh，that's different，'I said．'I think you are growing very，very slowly．I think you're still young，like me You're still growing and changing．Not like Buff．'
　　Another silence．Then，'Hummingbird is friend．'
　　I felt wonderful．The computer was twenty thousand years old and it wanted to be friends with me！
　　'Yes， I'm your friend，computer，'I said．'I'll be your friend all my life， but my life isn't long like yours Perhaps my children and grandchildren can be your friends too．'
　　'Computer is happy．'
　　'Oh，computer，everything's finished！'I said．'I thought Buff could learn to accept the animals like me， but he can't．He can't change how he thinks．And I think most people in the Galaxy are like him．They can't change．If they find the Star Zoo，they'll destroy all the animals．So it's impossible！ We can't put the animals on different planets．The animals will have to stay in the Star Zoo．One day the Star Zoo will die．After that there will be no life in the Galaxy except humans．Forever．
　　The computer said，'Computer will find answer to problem．Wait．'
　　I waited．And waited．I couldn't understand it．Computers think so fast！Why wasn't the computer telling me theanswer？
　　At last it spoke．'Computer has answer to problem．The answer is robots． Your robot looks very human． You will make a robot like an animal Humans will know it is a robot， not an animal．Humans will not go crazy．Humans will learn about animals．After some time humans will meet animals．Humans will not go crazy．'
　　'I think I understand，'I said．'People have to spend a long time with robot animals first． When they are not afraid， they can meet the real animals and accept them． Yes， it's a wonderful idea，computer！I could kiss you！'
　　'Nobody has kissed computer．Computer is interested．'
　　So I kissed the computer and I think it kissed me．






■ 8 An animal is made
　　Arobot can do many different things from taking care of a baby to building a spaceship．It can do anything except think．The Star Zoo computer was the only one that could think．
　　Well， our family robot could build a robot animal， easily． That was no problem．
　　First we had to choose what animal to make， so we went round the Star Zoo to look at all．the animals．Hee-Haw carried me and Hoo-Woo came with us．The robot followed．
　　I don't know how many rooms the Star Zoo had； I couldn't count them all．Some rooms were filled with water where there were big fish and small fish．There were horrible monsters walking under the water and I felt a little afraid again．
　　Some rooms were covered in snow and all the animals there had while fur．There were dry rooms， hot wet rooms， forest rooms…And animals and birds and trees and flowers！
　　There were more living things than I had ever dreamt of！
　　I sat on Hee-Haw's back as the donkey walked on．We went through a door into a room full of strange life， then we went through another door and into another room，It was like a dream．In a dream， things change suddenly，without reason．It was like that．
　　We went back to the computer．I didn't know which animal to choose and neither did the robot．Hee-Haw and Hoo-Woo didn't understand the problem；they weren't intelligent in the human way．
　　So I asked the computer．
　　'Watch humans，'the computer said．'Humans enjoy playing with animals．Find an animal which enjoys playing with humans．'
　　So we went to see the humans．
　　The humans in the Star Zoo couldn't speak． I sat down and watched them while the humans played up in the trees，swam in the pool and played games in the grass．They played all the time．
　　Most other animals didn't play with the humans．But finally I saw one animal come through the grass to play． It liked playing with humans！
　　The humans played with the animal for an hour．The animal and the humans enjoyed playing together．
　　'That's the animal you must make，'I told the robot．
　　The robot watched the animal and touched it and measured everything．In the end it was ready to build a robot just like that animal．
　　'What do you need to build it？'I asked．
　　'Plastic，'the robot answered．'I will use real fur on the outside．But I need some metal．Where can I find metal？'
　　There was only one thing in the Star Zoo made of metal－the computer！
　　The computer told the robot to take off two small pieces of metal from its back．
　　The robot worked fast．Sometimes it needed a special tool．Then it opened its stomach because the tools were kept inside the body there．
　　First，the robot made a plastic body which it covered with soft plastic，like a skin．Then it used fur to cover the skin．
　　I left before the robot finished because I was worried about Buff．I didn't want him to die．
　　Buff still wouldn't eat or drink But the worst thing was， he was still crazy．His mind wasn't getting better…
　　If Buff stays in the Star Zoo，I thought，he'll die．
　　I talked to him but he didn't answer．I knew he wanted to kill me．He wanted to kill all living things．
　　The robot finished its work and showed me a little animal．It looked，and sounded，and played like the real animal． I took it to the computer．
　　'Yes，it looks just like the animal，'the computer said．'It's very small-a baby animal．'the computer told me its name． It checked the animal，then said to the robot，'Make it warm．'
　　The little animal was cold．
　　So the robot made the baby animal warm， like the real animal．We were ready．
　　The robot put Buff to sleep，then put the spacesuit on him and carried him to the spaceship．
　　I was leaving the Star Zoo for the second time．Would our plan succeed， I wondered？ Before I went through the door，I looked back at all the life that existed only here in the Star Zoo，and in no other place in all the Galaxy！






■ 9 An animal is destroyed
　　Buff was asleep．I told the spaceship to take us to New Earth，the planet of the Star Council．I wasn't going back to my parents．I wanted to go to the top people．
　　A few minutes later the spaceship was falling towards a planet covered with tall buildings．Many of the buildings touched the clouds．I'd never been to New Earth before．I was just a young girl from a small planet and I felt very unimportant here．
　　We landed．I could see a lot of people walking quickly．They didn't stand and talk．They were too busy．Who was going to stop and talk to a young girl like me？
　　Everybody was wearing very expensive，fashionable clothes too！I felt stupid with just my old clothes with my name 'Hummingbird'on．I said to the robot，'Make a special dress for me．I want to look more important．'
　　A minute later I had the dress．It didn't look very good．It was grey and just like an old bag．
　　I put on the dress and it suddenly came to life． It moved over me， full of changing colours .When I looked in a mirror， I couldn't believe it． I looked fantastic！
　　When I got out of the spaceship， I wasn't afraid of anybody．
　　At first I thought the Star Council buildings were the high ones，up in the clouds．They weren't．I had to go below ground to an office where I spoke to a policeman．He didn't believe my story about the Star Zoo…until the robot told him it was all true．Robots can't lie．
　　The policeman looked at me for a long time．In the end he called a Star Council official．
　　He and the policeman took me to a lift and we went down many floors．Then they put me in a room and asked me questions．They wanted to see the robot animal but I said no．I said only the Star Council could see the robot animal．
　　Three hours later they were still asking me questions and I couldn't keep my eyes open．I was so tired．My dress had lost its colours．It was just grey again．I didn't feel important． I felt like a child．
　　But I didn't show them the robot animal．
　　The official said，' I don't believe you．There are no animals in the Galaxy now．Perhaps there never were any animals．They're only stories in the Book of Remembering．'
　　'Well， why are you asking me so many questions？'I said．
　　'Because your robot tells the same story．Because you have a crazy man in you spaceship-he's in hospital now．'
　　Suddenly the official got up and took me to the lift．We went down，down， down， very fast．
　　We came out into a room in the shape of a star． I felt frightened because I knew this was the Star Room where the Star Council met．
　　The Council men and women came in and took their places at the Star Table． The official told them my story， which my robot repeated．
　　Everybody looked at me，waiting for me to show them the robot animal．
　　The President of the Star Council said，'Where is this animal？'
　　'It's not an animal，'I said．' It's a robot． But it looks just the same as a real animal．''Where is it？'
　　I touched the robot's stomach．'In there，'I answered．
　　'Bring it out．We want to see it，'the President said．
　　'Yes， sir，'I said．I looked round at all the Councillors．I was afraid to speak to these important people but I had to tell them about the danger．'When Buff saw an animal，he went crazy． I went crazy at first，too．'
　　'We heard your story．'
　　'Please listen，'I said．'This is a robot．Please remember it's not a real animal．I don't want anybody here to go crazy．'
　　'Don't try to frighten us，girl．Bring out the animal．'
　　I told the robot to open its stomach，and it opened．The little robot animal jumped on to the Star Table．
　　It looked so alive！It opened its mouth and made the special noise of that animal． It had small sharp white teeth．
　　The mouth of every Councillor fell open at the same moment．
　　There was a sudden bright light．The little animal exploded．It was gone．There was nothing left except a little wet plastic on the Star Table and a smell of burning hair．
　　The Star Council official had destroyed it with his laser gun．
　　The Councillors were getting up and shouting．Their faces were full of hate．They had the same crazy eyes as Buff． Perhaps not as bad as Buff，because the animal had only been there for a second or two and I had told them it was a robot． But，like Buff， they wanted to kill and destroy．
　　Things got worse and worse．They started breaking chairs．Some of them used broken chairs to hit people．They were going crazy，just like Buff．
　　The plan had failed．The Star Council had gone crazy．I was very frightened．What had I done？






■ 10 Two of everything
　　It was a strange prison with no doors and no police to watch me．Well，I didn't know the special number for making the lifts work， so I couldn't escape by the lifts．There were stairs but it was ten kilometres straight up to get to the surface．
　　I couldn't get out．
　　I found food and water．Nobody came to see me for three days．
　　Finally a soldier arrived and took me back to the Star Room．
　　An old man with a very straight back sat at the Star Table．He was alone and looked tired．'Hummingbird，'he said and then stopped．
　　'Who are you，please？'I asked．I hadn't seen him before．
　　'I'm the new President，'he said，but he didn't sound happy about it ．
　　'So the President and the Councillors are still…'
　　'Still crazy- yes，'the old man said．'I think many of them will get better．They saw the animal only for a very short time．'
　　'It wasn't a real animal，'I said quickly．
　　'That didn't make any difference．You asked me who I am．I'm just one of the Star Councillors，but I wasn't in the Star Room when you showed them the animal． I was lucky． Now listen，Hummingbird．There is something I must tell you．Something difficult．'
　　'Is it about my family？'I asked，feeling afraid．
　　'No，Hummingbird．You are the only person in the Galaxy who knows where the Star Zoo is．If other people know about the Star Zoo， there will be killing． People will be killed．The Star Zoo will be destroyed．It is very important to keep the Star Zoo alive and so it is necessary to keep it secret．I 'm sorry，Hummingbird．You must stay here，ten kilometres down，all your life． I know you're a young girl and I'm sorry．'
　　'All my life？'I said．I couldn't believe it．
　　'Yes，'the old man said．'This is the planet of the Star Council so there is always work here you can do．I'm sorry．'
　　'What kind of work？'I asked．
　　'Well， everything is going crazy now．For example， we have some little children down here that nobody is taking care of．A robot is doing the job now—but little children need real humans．Would you like to try taking care of them？'
　　'OK，'I said．It was something to do．
　　I went to see the children， who were playing quietly with a robot． I laughed，because the robot was our family robot． I thought this robot and I would do something wonderful．But we could only take care of little children！
　　I sat on the floor and played with the children．They were all less than four years old．
　　They needed somebody．A few of the children were crying．They needed loving．Robots can sing and play games，but they can't love．
　　Only the Star Zoo computer can love．
　　Soon one little boy was sitting on my stomach and another boy was running round and round me．A little girl was pulling my hair and another girl was biting my finger．There was a lot of noise．
　　These children were more trouble than any animal in the Star Zoo！
　　'These girls and boys aren't going to be afraid of animals，'I said to the robot．'I can show them a robot animal and they won't go crazy． I just wish I had one．'
　　'You have，'the robot answered．'Shall I take out the other one？'
　　'What！'I shouted．The little boy fell off my stomach and began screaming． I picked him up and kissed him until the screaming changed to crying．I said，'Another robot animal？'
　　'Yes，'the robot said，touching its stomach．
　　Of course the robot had another！Robots always make two of everything．You don't have to tell them．They do it automatically．
　　The robot opened its stomach and the second robot animal jumped out． It was just like the first one．
　　The little boy stopped crying．He looked at the robot animal with big，round eyes．All the other children were looking，too．
　　The animal began to play． It tried to bite its tail and fell over its own feet． It was a funny， sweet animal． After one minute the children were round it in a circle，laughing and playing with it，just like the humans in the Star Zoo．
　　I watched them．This was very important．These children hadn't learnt to be afraid of animals because they had never heard of Earth，the Burning，or the Book of Remembering．
　　I watched and thought． I spoke softly to my robot：'If these children go on playing with this robot animal， they will never become afraid of animals． They won't go crazy．'I thought some more， and said，'But if their parents see the animal， the parents will go crazy．'
　　I thought carefully． Yes， there must be a special room in every house．A room which parents couldn't go in．A room for children only． Then children could play with robot animals in that room．
　　'That's it！'I said．'The children will still be happy to be with animals when they are parents．It might take twenty，thirty，forty years，but then—'
　　I heard the sound of somebody coming．I shouted to the robot，' Hide that animal， quick！'
　　The robot opened its stomach and the animal went inside．
　　All the children began crying．They wanted to have their wonderful animal back again！
　　It was the President．He looked round at all the crying children．'Did I do this？'he asked．
　　'No，'I answered．'Please stay．I have fantastic news for you．Listen to what just happened．'
　　The old man listened．First he was angry， then he was surprised but in the end he became very excited．
　　'Hummingbird，'the President said，'I must not see that robot animal． I don't want to go crazy．Your idea is…interesting．I think it will work．We must be very careful．We can begin with just one family and can learn from our mistakes． I think we can let you go free，Hummingbid．'
　　'You can see the animal again soon，'I promised the children，and kissed the ones that were still crying． 'So the little children really liked this animal！'the President said．'What kind of animal was it？Does the Book of Remembering talk about it？'
　　'The Book of Remembering talks about cats，'I answered．'This is a baby cat． I can't remember what the computer called it．Oh yes I do-it's called a kitten．'




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Kidnapped by Robert Stevenson





■ 1 David meets his uncle
　　It was early in the month of June，1751，when I shut the door of our house behind me for the last time．All my life I had lived in the quiet little village of Essendean，in the Lowlands of Scotland，where my father had been the dominie，or schoolteacher．But now that he and my mother were both dead，I had to leave the house．The new dominie would soon arrive，and he would teach at the school and live in the dominie's house．So，although I was only seventeen，there was nowhere for me to live，and no reason for me to stay in Essendean．
　　But my heart was beating with excitement as I walked down the road，because in my hand I carried the letter that my father had given me just before he died．‘Davie，’he had said，‘when I am dead，take this to the house of Shaws，near Cramond．That's where I came from，and that's where you must go．Put this letter into the hands of Ebenezer Balfour．’
　　Balfour！The same name as my own！It was the first time I had heard of any of our family outside Essendean．
　　So I decided to walk to Cramond，hoping that perhaps this Mr Balfour，in his fine big house，would receive me kindly，and help me to become a rich man one day．With my plaid over my shoulder，I walked fast up the hill away from the village．What an adventure，to leave that sleepy place，where nothing ever happened，and go to a great，busy house，to be with rich and important people of my own name and blood！But when I reached the top of the hill，I turned a little sadly，to take my last look at the dominie's house，and Essendean churchyard，where my father and mother lay．
　　My journey northwards took almost two days．By midday on the second day I could see the smoking chimneys of Edinburgh in front of me，and soon I arrived in Cramond．
　　Now I began to ask people on the road for the house of Shaws．Their answers worried me a little．Some people seemed surprised，some afraid，and some angry，when I spoke the name of Ebenezer Balfour．I could not understand this，but it was too far to go back to Essendean that day， and I wanted to find the rest of the Balfour family very much So I continued on my way，and when I met a dark，wild-looking woman coming towards me，I asked her where the house of Shaws was She took me to the top of the next hill，and showed me a large building standing alone in the bottom of the next valley．Although the fields around were green，and the farmland was excellent，the house itself looked unfinished and empty．Part of its roof was missing．There was no road to it，and no smoke coming from any of its chimneys，nor was there any garden． ‘That！’I cried．‘No，it can't be！’ ‘It is！’cried the woman angrily．‘That is the house of Shaws！Blood built it，blood stopped the building of if，and blood shall bring it down！Black is the heart of Ebenezer Balfour！Ye can tell him from me that I hope to see him die，and his house fall down around him！’ The woman turned and disappeared．I stood where she left me，shaking like a leaf，and looking down at the house for a long time．But when it began to get dark，I noticed some smoke coming out of the chimney，and felt a little more hope ful．‘There must be a fire，and cooking，and people in the house，’I thought．So I walked up to the front door．The house seemed locked up and unwelcoming，but there was fire light shining through the kitchen window，and I could hear someone talking quietly to himself．Bravely，I lifted my hand and knocked loudly on the strong wooden door．The house was suddenly silent，and there was no reply．I knocked and knocked，and shouted as loudly as I could．Finally，the win dow opened，and a man holding a gun put his head out．
　　‘What do ye want？’he asked．
　　‘I've come here with a letter for Mr Ebenezer Balfour of Shaws．Is he here？’
　　‘Who is it from？’asked the man with the gun．
　　‘That's none of your business，’I replied，getting angry．
　　‘Well，put the letter down by the door，and leave．’
　　‘I will not！’I answered sharply．‘I'm going to give it to Mr Balfour himself．The letter introduces me to him．’
　　‘Who are ye then？’was the next question．
　　‘I'm not ashamed of my name． It's David Balfour．’
　　The man almost dropped his gun．After a long while，he asked in a changed voice，‘Is your father dead？’I was too surprised to answer，but he continued，‘Aye，he must be dead，and that's why ye have come．Well，man，I'll let ye in，’and he disappeared from the window．
　　Now the door was unlocked，and a voice from the darkness said，‘Go into the kitchen and touch nothing．’I obeyed，while the man locked the heavy door carefully again．I found myself in the emptiest kitchen that I had ever seen．There was a fire，but no other light．On the table was a bowl of porridge and a glass of water，in front of the only chair．Around the walls were several locked chests．There was no other furniture．The man who now appeared in the kitchen was small，mean-looking and white-faced，between fifty and sev enty years old，and wearing a dirty old nightshirt．The worst thing about him was that he could neither take his eyes away from me，nor look straight into my face．
　　‘If ye're hungry，’he said，‘ye can eat that porridge．It's grand food，porridge！Let me see the letter！’
　　‘It's for Mr Balfour，not you，’I replied．
　　‘And who do ye think I am？Give me Alexander's letter！Ye may not like me or my house or my porridge，but I'm your born uncle，Davie，my man！’
　　This was the end of all my hopes．I was too tired and miser able to speak，so I silently gave him the letter，and sat down to eat the porridge．
　　‘Your father's been dead a long time？’he asked，giving me a quick look from his sharp eyes．
　　‘Three weeks，sir，’I said．
　　‘He was a secretive man，Alexander was．Perhaps he didn't talk much about me？ Or about the house of Shaws？’
　　‘I never knew he had a brother，sir，or ever heard the name of Shaws．’
　　‘To think of that！’he replied．‘A strange man！’But he seemed very pleased，and began to look at me with more inter est．Soon he jumped up and said，‘We're going to get on well，Davie！What's mine is yours，man，and what's yours is mine．Blood's thicker than water，and there's only ye and me of the name of Balfour． Now I'll show ye to your bed．’
　　He took me up some dark stairs and showed me into a room．I could not see anything． ‘Can I have a light，sir？’I asked． ‘No，ye can't．No lights in this house！I'm afraid of fires，ye see．Good night to ye，Davie，my man．’And before I had time to reply，he pulled the door shut and locked it from the outside．The room was very cold，but luckily I had my plaid with me，so I covered myself with it like a blanket，and soon fell asleep．
　　The next day my uncle and I had a small bowl of porridge and a glass of water for breakfast，lunch and supper．He did not speak much to me，but was clearly thinking hard．I often noticed him looking at me，while pretending to do something different， and he never left me alone in the kitchen with the locked chests，in which，I supposed，he kept his money．I did not like the way he looked at me，and began to wonder if he was a little crazy，and perhaps dangerous．
　　After supper he said suddenly，‘Davie，I've been thinking．I promised your father a bit of money for ye before ye were born．A promise is a promise—and so I'm going to give ye…forty pounds！’ These last words seemed very painful to him．He added，in a kind of scream，‘Scots！’
　　A Scottish pound was the same as an English shilling．I could see that his story was a lie，so I laughed at him，saying，‘Oh，think again，sir！English pounds，surely！’
　　‘That's what I said，'replied my uncle quickly．‘Go outside for a moment，and I'll get the money for ye．’
　　I was smiling as I went out，sure that he would give me nothing at all．It was a dark night，and I could hear wind in the hills．‘There may be thunder later，’I thought，not knowing how important the weather would be to me that night．
　　But when my uncle called me in again，he counted thirty eight English pounds in gold into my hands．It clearly hurt him to do it，and he kept back the last two pounds，but I did not mind that．Surprised and pleased，I thanked him warmly．
　　‘Now，’he said，looking cleverly at me，‘ye can give me something，Davie．I'm getting old now，and I need help．’
　　‘Of course，sir，’I answered．‘What can I do？’
　　‘Well，go outside and climb the stairs at the other end of the house，where the building isn't finished yet．Go up to the room at the top，and bring down the chest that ye'll find there．It's got valuable papers in it．’
　　‘Can I have a light，sir？’I asked．
　　‘No，’he said sharply．‘No lights in my house！’ ‘Very well，sir．Are the stairs good？’
　　‘They're grand，’ said he．‘The stairs are grand．Out I went into the night．As I was feeling my way along the outside wall，there was a sudden flash of lightning，then darkness again．I found the stairs and started climbing．I was about fifteen metres above the ground，when there was another flash of lightning．That was lucky for me，because it showed me that the steps were uneven， and that I could easily fall to my death．‘These are the grand stairs！’I thought．‘Perhaps my uncle wants me to die！’Now I was very careful，and I felt each step with my hands before I put my foot on it．A few steps later my hand felt cold stone，and then nothing more．The stairs ended there，twenty metres above the ground．I felt cold with fear，when I thought of the danger that I had been in．Sending a stranger up those stairs in the dark was sending him straight to his death．
　　Angrily，I turned and felt my way down．There was a crash of thunder，and suddenly the rain came down．At the bottom of the stairs I looked towards the kitchen，and could see，in the next flash of lightning，a figure standing still in the doorway，listening． When the thunder sounded again，louder than before，he ran back inside，and I followed as softly as I could．I found him sitting in the kitchen，drinking whisky straight from the bottle，and shaking with fear．Quietly I came up behind him，and，putting my hands sud denly on his shoulders，cried，‘Ah！’
　　My uncle gave a kind of broken cry，and fell to the floor like a dead man．His face was a strange blue colour，and I began to think that he really was dead．At last his eyes opened，and he looked up and saw me．‘Oh man，are ye alive or a ghost？’he cried ‘Get me my medicine，Davie—it's for my heart．’I found the medicine bottle and gave him some．He soon began to look a little better． ‘Why did you lie to me？’I asked angrily．‘Why did you give me money？ And why did you try to kill me？ Answer me！’
　　‘I'll tell ye tomorrow，Davie，I promise．Help me to bed now，will ye？’He still looked very ill，so I could not refuse．But this time I locked his bedroom door，and went to sleep in front of the kitchen fire．
　　When I woke up in the morning，I felt very pleased with myself．‘He thinks he's cleverer than me，but he isn't！’I thought．When I let my uncle out of his room，I asked him again for an explanation After a while，he said，‘Davie，I have some business with a ship's captain at Queensferry．Now，we could walk over there，and when I've done my business，we could visit the lawyer，Mr Rankeillor．He'll answer all your questions．He's an honest man，and he knew your father．What do ye say to that？’
　　I thought for a moment．I had never seen the sea，but had always wanted to！‘It's a grand idea，’I said．
　　It was a morning's walk to Queensferry，Which was west of Edinburgh，but we did not say a word to each other on the way．Suddenly，at the top of a hill，we could see the Firth of Forth below us，blue and calm，with white sails on it．
　　‘Ye see that public house？’asked my uncle．‘Captain Hoseason's there，to do business with me．There's the ship's boat on the beach，waiting to take him to the ship．And there's the ship itself！A grand ship！’
　　I had to agree with him．The sailors were getting the ship ready for sailing，and I thought what an exciting adventure that would be—to sail away to a foreign country．
　　We walked down the hill to the public house and met the captain there．He was a tall，dark，serious-looking man，who shook hands politely with me．Stupidly，I left these two men to their business，and ran down to the beach，to talk to the sailors and look at the boats．It was all new and very interest ing to me．
　　As I was coming back，I met the owner of the public house．
　　‘Good morning，’he said．‘Did ye come with Ebenezer？’
　　‘I did，’I replied．‘He isn't well liked，I understand．’
　　‘That's true，’he answered．‘Nobody speaks well of him．It all started with that story about Mr Alexander，his brother．’
　　‘What story？’I asked．
　　‘Oh，just that Ebenezer had killed him．Did ye never hear that？’
　　‘And why would he kill my f—，I mean，Alexander？’
　　‘To get the house，of course，the house of Shaws．’
　　‘Aye，man？Was my—was Alexander older than Ebenezer？’
　　‘Indeed he was！No other reason for killing him！’
　　This was a great surprise to me！I had thought that my fa ther was the younger brother，and I now understood why my uncle had lied to me，and wanted to kill me．The house of Shaws had belonged to my father，not my uncle，and now I had inherited it．The poor country boy who had walked from Essendean was the owner of a fine house and farmland！My head was full of the wonderful things that I could do in my life，as I looked，unseeing，at the sea．
　　Just then my uncle and the captain came out of the public house．The captain smiled in a friendly way as he spoke to me．‘Sir，’he said，‘Mr Balfour has told me a lot about ye．I'm only sorry I haven't time to get to know ye better．But I'd like ye to come on to my ship for half an hour，before we sail，and have a drink with me．’
　　Now，more than anything in the world，I wanted to see the inside of a ship，but I remembered that I had to be careful．‘My uncle and I have to see the lawyer，sir，’I replied，‘so I'm afraid we may not have enough time．’
　　‘Aye，aye，’he answered，‘I know，but ye see，the ship's boat can put ye both down near Rankeillor's house，after ye've seen the ship，so ye won't lose any time．’ Suddenly he said quietly in my ear，‘Watch out for the old man—he wants to hurt ye．Come and talk about it．’Putting his arm in mine，he said loudly，‘What can I bring ye back from my travels？ A friend of Mr Balfour's is a friend of mine！’
　　By this time we were on the beach， and he was helping my uncle and me into the boat．I thought that I had found a good friend and helper，and I was very excited as we came closer to the great ship，full of busy，noisy sailors．The captain and I were the first to climb up the ship's side，and at the top the captain immediately put his arm through mine and began to talk about the ship．
　　‘But where is my uncle？’I asked suddenly．I pulled myself away from the captain's arm，and ran to the side of the ship．Sure enough，there was the boat returning to Queensferry，with my uncle sitting in it．I screamed，‘Help， help！Murder！’and my uncle slowly turned to look at me．
　　I did not see any more．Already strong hands were pulling me away．Then something hit my head；I saw a great flash of fire，and fell to the ground．






■ 2 Kidnapped！
　　When I woke up in darkness，my head was hurting badly，and I was unable to move my hands or feet．I could hear the sailors’ shouts and the sound of the wind and the waves．The whole world seemed to go up，up，up，and then down again．I felt very ill，and at first could not under stand what was happening．After a while I realized that I must be somewhere inside the ship，which was moving very fast through the water．‘I've been kidnapped！’I thought angrily．It was clear that my uncle and the captain had planned it together．I began to feel frightened and hopeless，as I lay there in the dark．
　　Some hours later，a light shone in my face．Mr Riach，one of the ship's officers，stood looking down at me．He washed the cut on my head，gave me some water，and told me kindly to go to sleep．The next time he came，I was feeling very hot and ill．He had brought Captain Hoseason with him．
　　‘Now，sir，see for yourself，’ said Mr Riach．‘The lad's seriously ill．We must take him out of this unhealthy hole at once．
　　‘That's none of your business，’answered the captain．‘Ye're paid to do your job，not to worry about the by．He's staying down here．’
　　‘I'm only paid to be an officer on this ship，’ replied Mr Riach sharply．He looked hard at the captain．‘I'm not paid，like you，to kidnap and murder—’
　　Hoseason turned on him angrily．‘What did ye say？’be cried．‘What do ye mean？’
　　‘You understand，’ said Mr Riach，looking calmly at him．
　　‘You should know me by now，Mr Riach．I'm a hard man．But if ye say the lad will die—’
　　‘Aye，he will！’ said Mr Riach．
　　‘Well，sir，put him where ye like！’
　　So I was carried up into the sunlight a few minutes later，and put in a cabin where some of the sailors were sleeping．It was a wonderful feeling to see the daylight and to be able to talk to people again．I lay in the cabin for several days，and after a while began to feel better．The sailors were kind to me in their way．They brought me food and drink， and told me about their families at home．I discovered from them that the ship was sailing to the Carolinas，in North America．There the captain was planning to sell me as a slave，to work in a rich man's house or on a farm．
　　I also learnt that both the ship's officers，Mr Riach and Mr Shuan，enjoyed drinking far too much．The sailors liked Mr Shuan，but said that he was sometimes violent when he had drunk a lot．One of the sailors was a young boy， called Ransome．His job was to bring meals to the captain and officers in the round-house，a big cabin on the top of the ship，where the officers slept and ate．When Ransome dropped something or did something wrong，Mr Shuan used to hit him，and I often saw the poor boy crying．
　　One night，about nine o’clock，I heard one of the sailors in the cabin saying quietly to the others，‘Shuan's killed him at last！’We all knew who he meant．Just then the captain came in．I was surprised to see him walk towards me and say kindly，‘My man，We Want ye to help us in the round-house．From now on，ye'll sleep there instead of Ransome．’As he spoke，two sailors carried Ransome into the cabin His face was as white as a sheet，and he did not move．My blood ran cold when I saw him．
　　I obeyed the captain，and ran to the round-house．It was a large room，with a table，a bench and locked cupboards All the best food and drink was kept there，under the captain's eyes，as well as the guns．When I entered，I saw Mr Shuan sitting at the table，with a bottle of whisky in front of him．He did not seem to notice what was happening around him，and was looking fixedly at the table．
　　Mr Riach soon joined the captain and me．He looked at Hoseason meaningfully，and I understood from his look that Ransome was dead．We three all stood silently looking down at Mr Shuan．
　　Suddenly the captain stepped forward．‘Do ye know what ye've done？’he cried．‘Ye've murdered the boy！’
　　Mr Shuan put a hand to his head．‘Well，’he said，‘he brought me a dirty glass！’
　　The captain and Mr Riach and I looked at each other，almost frightened．Then Hoseason took Mr Shuan by the arm，and told him to go to bed．The murderer cried a little at first，but he took off his boots and lay down，like a small child．
　　‘Mr Riach，’ said the captain，when we could see that Mr Shuan was asleep，‘nobody on land must know what happened tonight．We'll say that the boy fell into the sea．Get us a drink，David，we both need one，’and he gave me the key to the cupboards．
　　In the next few days I was very busy，running here and there with the officers’food and drink．Mr Riach and the cap tain were surprisingly patient with me when I made mistakes．Perhaps they were thinking of the poor boy who had died．But Mr Shuan was very strange after Ransome's death． He did not seem to know what he had done，or to recognize me．On my second day in the round-house，he looked at me with a white face and fear in his eyes．‘You weren't here before？’he asked．
　　‘No，sir，’I replied．
　　‘There was another boy？’he asked．‘Ah！Yes，I thought so，’and sitting down，he called for some more whisky．
　　It wasn't a hard life for me．I was able to eat well，and talk to Mr Riach，who spoke to me like a friend．But I could not forget poor Ransome．As the days passed，I became more and more worried．I knew that，when the ship arrived in the Carolinas，I would no longer be a free man，but a slave．I thought hard，but there did not seem to be any way of escaping．
　　About a week later，we were sailing round the rocky coast of northern Scotland in very bad weather．It was difficult to see anything because of the thick fog．One evening there was a great crash，and the officers ran out to see what had happened．I thought we had hit a rock，but in fact it was a small boat As we watched，the boat broke in two，and went to the bottom with all its men，except the one passenger．At the moment of the crash，this man managed to jump up and catch the side of the ship and pull himself up．
　　The captain brought him into the round-house He was smallish but well-built，with an open，sunburnt face，and bright，amused eyes When he took off his long coat，I could see that he had a pair of pistols and was wearing a sword at his side．Although his life had clearly been in great danger，he seemed very calm，and spoke politely to the captain Hoseason was looking with interest at the man's clothes．He Was Wear ing a hat with feathers，a blue coat with silver buttons，and expensive-looking lace round his neck．
　　‘I'm sorry about the boat，sir，’ said the captain．
　　‘I've lost some grand friends today，’ replied the stranger，‘and that's worse than losing ten boats．’
　　‘Well，sir，there are more men in the world than boats，’ replied the captain，still watching him closely．‘I know，be cause I've been in France，like you．’
　　He said these last words clearly and carefully．They seemed to have a special meaning．The stranger put his hand quickly on his pistol．
　　‘Don't worry，’ said Hoseason．‘Ye've a French soldier's coat on your back and a Scottish tongue in your head，that's true，but so has many an honest man these days．’
　　‘Well，sir，’ replied the stranger，‘I must tell you that I'm one of those honest Highlanders who were proud to fight for their homes，their clan and their country in 1745，against the English King．And I must tell you another thing．If King George's soldiers find me，I'll be in trouble．I was on my way to France，where some of my clansmen live now．But in the fog my boat missed the French ship that was meeting me．So if you can take me to France，I'll pay you well．’
　　He opened his purse and showed that it was full of gold coins．The captain seemed excited as he looked at the money，and then at the man's face．
　　‘To France？’he replied．‘No，I can't do that．But to the Highlands，aye，we can discuss that．’ They sat down together，and in the end agreed that the captain would take the stranger to Loch Linnhe，on the northwest coast of Scot land，for sixty pounds．There the Highlander would be among friends，and safe from the English army．He and Hoseason shook hands，and the captain left me alone with the stranger．
　　He had told the captain that the gold was not his own．Some of the Highlanders had escaped to France after the Forty-Five，but their friends and clansmen in Scotland sometimes managed to find a little money to send them．It was this man's job to take the money across to France，and he did this by travelling secretly to Scotland as often as possible．I thought he was very brave．‘If he's caught by the English army，they'll kill him！’ I told myself．I liked the way he seemed to enjoy living dangerously．
　　When he asked me for whisky，I had to go to ask the cap tain for the key to the cupboard．I found Hoseason and his officers talking quietly in a corner，and heard them planning to kill the stranger and steal his money．They seemed to think that I would help them，and asked me to bring them secretly some guns from the round-house．I went slowly back to the stranger，not sure what I should do．But when I entered the round-house，and saw him eating his supper，I decided at once．
　　‘They're going to attack you，and murder you！’ I told him．
　　‘What！’he cried，jumping up．‘Will ye stand with me，against them？’
　　‘I will！ I'm no thief or murderer！’I replied bravely．
　　‘Are ye for King George？’
　　‘More or less，’I answered．
　　‘Well，Mr More-or-Less，what's your name？’
　　‘David Balfour，’I said，and then，thinking that a man with so fine a coat must like fine people，I added，‘of Shaws．’
　　‘My name is Stewart，’he said proudly．‘Alan Breck，they call me．And Stewart is a king's name，so it's good enough for me，although I have no name of a farmhouse to add to it．’He looked around him．‘Now，David，I'll take any man who comes in through this door．You must watch the window， and the door behind me，and shoot anyone who tries to enter．
　　He gave me a pistol．I was very frightened，but tried hard not to show it．The ship seemed very quiet．Suddenly there was the sound of running feet，and a shout，and then I heard fighting in the doorway．I looked over my shoulder，and saw Mr Shuan， just as Alan drove his sword into the officer's body．Then several men ran at my door．I did not want to hurt them，but it was now or never．I lifted my pistol and shot at them．One man fell，and the others ran away．After a few moments，the sailors attacked again．Alan fought as bravely as before， his sword now red with blood． He was clearly enjoying himself．I had no time to think，but when two more men appeared at the window，I shot them too．Now there were several bodies on the floor，and blood everywhere．
　　Suddenly I realized that we had won，and that the danger was over．Alan was driving the men out of the round-house like sheep．When he returned，he took me in his arms．
　　‘David！’he cried．‘I love ye like a brother．And oh，man，am I not a grand fighter？’I had to agree．He took a knife from the table and cut a silver button off his blue coat．‘Take this，David．The buttons come from my father，Duncan Stewart．where ye show that button，the friends of Alan Breck will come to ye．’He spoke as proudly as a king，and I tried not to smile．
　　We slept in the round-house，one of us keeping watch all night，and the next morning the captain came to speak to us． ‘Ye'veve won the fight，sir，’he said to Alan．‘We're sailing through the Little Minch now，and I'll keep my promise to take ye to Loch Linnhe．But ye've killed my chief officer，Shuan，and without him I can't find my way safely round these rocky coasts．We'll go round the island of Mull，but I warn ye，it'll be dangerous．
　　Hoseason was right to be worried．All that day Alan and I sat in the round-house and told each other the stories of our lives，but by night the wind was growing stronger and the sailors found it hard to keep the ship away from the dangerous rocks．As we came round Earraid，a small island close to the larger island of Mull，there was a sudden，terrible crash，and we realized that the ship had hit a rock．There was only one thing to do-leave the ship and try to reach land in the ship's boat．But as we were climbing down into the boat，a great wave hit the ship and knocked some of us into the sea．
　　I went down and came up again several times . Then，luckily，I managed to find a piece of wood，which helped me to stay up in the water．I looked round，but could not see Alan , or any of the sailors，or the boat．My only hope was to try to swim to Earraid，which I could see，not far away，in the moonlight．It was hard，tiring work，but I reached it，and was very grateful to step on to dry land at last．






■ 3 David is alone
　　It was a cold night，so I could not sit down to rest．In stead，I walked up and down on the beach，trying to keep warm．There was no sound except the crash of the waves．I felt very lonely and afraid．
　　In the morning I climbed a hill，and looked out over the sea，but there was nothing at all on the water．And around me on the island，I could not see any houses or people．I did not like to think what had happened to my friend Alan and the others，and I did not want to look at this emptiness any longer．So I climbed down again，and walked eastwards．I was hoping to find a house，where I could dry my clothes，and get something to eat． I soon discovered that nobody lived on Earraid．It was too far to swim to Mull，which could see across the water．I thought perhaps I could wade across，but when I tried it，the water was too deep，and I had to turn back．By now it had started to rain，and I felt very miserable．
　　Then I remembered the piece of wood，which had already saved my life once．It would help me to get across the sea to Mull！So I walked all the way back to the beach where I had arrived．The piece of wood was in the sea，so I waded into the water to get it．But as I came closer，it moved away from me．And when the water was too deep for me to stand，the piece of wood was still several metres away．I had to leave it，and went back to the beach．It was a terrible moment for me．I was feeling very tired，hungry and thirsty，with no hope of getting away from this lonely island．For the first time since leaving Essendean，I lay down and cried． I do not want to remember the time that I spent on Earraid．I had nothing with me except my uncle's gold and Alan's silver button，and as I had never lived near the sea，I did not know what to eat or how to fish．In fact，I found some shellfish among the rocks on the coast，and ate them，but I was very sick afterwards．That was the only food that I could find，so I was always hungry on Earraid．All day and all night it rained heavily，but there was no roof or tree on the island，and my clothes were cold and wet on my body．
　　I chose to spend most of my time in the north of Earraid，on a little hill．From here I could see the old church on the island of Iona，not far away to the west，and smoke from people's houses on Mull，to the east．I used to watch this smoke，and think of the people there，and their comfortable lives．This gave me a little hope，in my lonely life among the rocks and the rain and the cold sea．
　　Two days passed，and on the third day two things happened．First，I discovered that I had lost almost all my money through a hole in my pocket．I only had three of my uncle's thirty-eight pounds left．But worse was to come．While I was sitting on a rock，looking out over Iona，I suddenly noticed a small boat moving fast through the Water．I jumped to my feet and shouted as loudly as I could．The two men in the boat were near enough to hear．They shouted back in Gaelic，and laughed．But the boat did not turn，and sailed on，right in front of my eyes，to Iona． I could not understand why they did not come to help me．I continued shouting wildly，although I could no longer see them．And then，I lay down and cried for the second time．This time I wasn't sad，but angry，because I thought that they had left me to die alone in that terrible place．
　　The next morning，I was surprised to see that the same men were sailing towards Earraid from Iona．At once I ran down to the rocky coast to meet them．The boat came near me，but stayed a few metres away in the water．There was a third man in the boat，who was talking and laughing with the others．Then he stood up and spoke fast to me in Gaelic，which I could not understand．But sometimes he used an English word，and once I heard the word ‘tide’．This gave me a flash of hope． ‘Do you mean—that when the tide is low…？’I cried，and could not finish． ‘Yes，yes，’he called back，‘tide，’and laughed again． I turned my back on the boat and ran back excitedly to the east of the island，where Earraid was the closest to Mull．And sure enough，there was now only a little water between the is lands．I was able to wade through it easily，and reached Mull with a happy shout．How stupid of me not to realize that it was possible to get to Mull，twice a day，at low tide！Now I felt very grateful to the boatmen for guessing my problem，and coming back to help me． I walked towards the smoke that I had seen so often from Earraid，and reached a long，low house built of stone．Outside sat an old man，smoking his pipe in the sun．He spoke a little English， and told me that the officers and sailors from the ship had all arrived there safely a few days before． ‘Was one of them dressed in fine clothes？’I asked． ‘Aye，there was one like that，’he smiled．‘Ye must be the lad with the silver button！’ ‘Why，yes！’I said，surprised． ‘Well then，your friend says that ye must follow him to the house of his clansman，James Stewart，in Appin．’
　　He and his wife gave me food and drink，and let me sleep that night in their house． In the morning I thanked them for their kindness，and started my journey to Appin．
　　I walked across Mull to Torosay，where I took a boat across the water to Lochaline．Then I walked to Kingairlock，where I took another boat across Loch Linnhe to Appin．This took six days，and on my way I met and spoke to a number of travellers．I heard all about Alan's clan，the Stewarts，and their enemies，the Campbells．Although they were both High land clans，the Campbells and Stewarts had hated each other for years，and now the Campbells were helping the English army drive many Highlanders out of their homes． Indeed， in a day or two， I heard， red-haired Colin Campbell himself was com ing to Appin， with King George's soldiers， to drive the Stew arts out and so destroy his enemies． But I heard also of James Stewart， head of the Stewart clan in Appin， and that he and his clansmen would dearly love to see Colin Campbell dead．
　　People also talked of a man called Alan Breck． Some called him a murderer； others said that he was a brave fighter． He was in danger every time he returned to the Highlands，be cause the English would pay a good price for him-dead or alive． I listened with interest to everything that they told me．But I liked it best when I heard Alan described as a fine man and an honest Highlander．
　　When I got out of the boat in Appin， I sat down among some trees to decide what to do next． Should I go on， and join Alan， whose friends were King George's enemies， and whose life was full of danger，or should I go back south again，quietly and safely， to the Lowlands？
　　As I was thinking， four men on horses came past me on the road． As soon as I saw these men， I decided to continue my adventure， although I cannot explain why．
　　I stopped the first man， who was tall and red－haired．
　　‘Could you tell me the way to James Stewart's house，sir？’I asked．
　　All the men looked at each other． The red－haired man did not reply，but spoke to one of the others，who looked like a lawyer．‘Is Stewart calling his people together， do ye think？’
　　The lawyer replied，‘We'd better wait here for the sold iers to join us， before we go any further．’
　　The red－haired man，I suddenly realized，must be Colin Campbell himself．‘If you're worried about me，’ I said，‘I'm not a Stewart， but a Lowlander， and I'm for King George．’ ‘That's well said，’ replied Campbell，‘but， if I may ask，why is an honest Lowlander like you so far from his home？Today is not a good day for travelling． This is the day when the Appin Stewarts have to leave their farms， and there may be trouble．”
　　He was turning to speak to the lawyer again，
　　when there came a sudden bang from the hill， and Campbell fell off his horse．‘They've shot me！’ he cried， holding his heart．
　　He died almost immediately． The men's faces were white as they looked down at his body．I saw something move on the hill，and noticed， among the trees， a man with a gun， turning away from the road．
　　‘Look！ The murderer！’ I cried， and began to run up the hill towards him． He saw me chasing him， and went faster．Soon he disappeared behind a rock， and I could no longer see him． I stopped next to some trees， then I heard a voice below，on the road．
　　The lawyer was shouting to a large number of redcoated soldiers， who had just joined the men around Campbell's dead body．‘Ten pounds if ye catch that lad！’ he cried．He's one of the murderers！ He stopped us in the road，to give the killer a better chance to shoot Campbell！’
　　Now I felt a new kind of fear． My life was in serious danger， although I had not done anything wrong．
　　My mouth felt dry， and for a moment I could not move． I stood there in the open，on the hill，while the soldiers lifted their guns，ready to shoot．
　　‘Jump in here among the trees，’ said a voice near me．
　　I did not know what I was doing， but I obeyed． As I did so， I heard the banging of the guns， and realized that the sol diers were shooting at me． In the shadow of the trees， I found Alan Breck standing there． It was he who had spoken to me．






■ 4 Escape through the heather
　　We had no time for conversation．‘Come！’ Alan said，and started running along the side of the hill， keeping low to the ground． I followed him like a sheep． We ran and ran， faster than I had ever run before， and my heart was beat ing wildly． Sometimes， to my surprise， Alan straightened his back and showed himself to the soldiers who were chasing us．
　　After fifteen minutes， Alan stopped， lay flat in the heather，and turned to me．‘Now，’ he said，‘this is serious． Do what I do，if ye don't want to die’．And just as fast，but much more carefully and secretly， we went back almost the same way that we had come． At last we arrived back in the wood where I had found Alan．
　　We fell down in the heather， and lay without moving for a long time．My legs hurt，my head was aching，and I thought I was dead．
　　Alan was the first to speak．‘Well，’ he said，‘that was hot work， David．’
　　I said nothing． I had seen murder done． I knew that Colin Campbell had been Alan's greatest enemy， and I had found Alan hiding in the wood． Although I didn't think that he had actually shot Campbell，I felt sure that he had planned the killing．I coult not look at him．
　　‘Are ye still tired？’ he asked．
　　‘No，’ I replied， my face turned away from him，‘no， I'm not tired now．Alan，I can't stay with you，I must leave you．I liked you very much， but we're two different people，that's all．’
　　‘Ye must explain what ye mean by that， David，’ said Alan， looking very serious．
　　‘ Alan， why do you ask？ You know very well that Colin Campbell is lying dead in the road in his own blood．’
　　Alan was silent for a moment，‘Well， Mr Balfour of Shaws，’he said at last，‘I promise ye that I did not plan the murder， or know anything about it．’
　　‘Thank God for that！’ I cried， and offered him my hand．
　　He did not appear to see it．I don't know why ye're so worried about a dead Campbell，’ he said． ‘I know that you hate their clan， Alan， but taking a life in cold blood is a terrible thing to do．Do you know who did it？’
　　‘I wouldn't recognize him again，’ said Alan， shaking his head sadly，‘I'm good at forgetting，David．”
　　I had to laugh at that．Then I remembered something．‘But when we were running away， you showed yourself to the sol diers， to give the murderer a chance to escape！’
　　‘Any Highlander would do that． The best place for the lad who shot Colin Campbell is the heather，and we must all do what we can to help him keep away from the soldiers．’
　　I shook my head at this． These Highlanders were strange，wild people， to be sure． But Alan was ready to die for what he thought was right， and I liked him for that． I offered him my hand again， and this time he took it．
　　‘Now， David，’ he said，‘we must escape too． The Campbells will accuse us both of the murder．’
　　‘But we didn't do it！’ I cried．‘We can prove that in court！’
　　‘Man， I'm surprised at ye，’ said Alan．‘Do ye not know that if a Campbell is killed， the accused has to go to court in Inveraray， in the heart of Campbell country？ When the Campbell lawyers have finished with ye，ye'll be dead！’
　　This frightened me a little．‘ All right， Alan，’ I said，‘ I'll go with you．’
　　‘But remember，’ said Alan，‘it'll be a hard life． Ye'll have to sleep in the open air， and ye'll often have an empty stomach． Ye can choose-either live in the heather with me，or die at the hands of the Campbells．’
　　‘That's easy to decide，’ I said， and we shook hands on it．
　　When we looked between the trees， we could just see the redcoats of the soldiers， still moving away from us across the hills． Alan smiled， and told me that we would go first to the house of his clansman， James Stewart， and then to the Low lands． The Campbells and the English soldiers would not think of looking for us there， and Alan could find a place on a ship sailing to France．
　　We walked for several hours， and arrived that night at a large house in a valley．
　　There were lights in all the windows，and people were running in and out of the open doors． Alan whistled three times， and we were met at the door by a tall，good-looking man of about fifty， who welcomed us in Gaelic．
　　‘James Stewart， ’ said Alan，‘I'll ask ye to speak in English， because my friend here comes from the Lowlands，and cannot speak Gaelic．’
　　James spoke politely to me for a few moments， but soon he turned back to Alan，with a very worried look on his face ‘This is a terrible accident，’ he said．‘It will bring trouble to all of us！’
　　‘Well，man，’ said Alan，‘ye should be grateful that Colin Campbell is dead！’
　　‘Aye，’ replied James，‘but he was killed in Appin， remem ber that， Alan， so it's the Appin Stewarts who'll be accused．And I'm a man with a family！’
　　I looked around me． Men with white， frightened faces were hurrying here and there， without any clear idea of what they ought to do first．
　　Some were hiding guns and swords， while others were burning papers． When James saw me looking sur prised， he explained，‘The soldiers'll search my house first，ye see， and I don't want them to find anything．’
　　We went inside， and met James's wife and children， who were crying in a corner． I felt very sorry for them， but we did not have much time to talk． Alan explained what we needed for our escape， and soon James's men brought us two swords，two pistols， some food， a cooking pot and a bottle of whisky．We needed money too， because Alan had given his gold to an other man to take to France． But James had only a little to give us．
　　‘Ye must find a safe place somewhere near，’ he said， ‘and send me a message． I'll find some more money for ye， and send it to ye．
　　But， Alan，’ and here he stopped for a moment，biting his finger worriedly，‘I'll have to accuse ye of killing that Campbell． I'll have to！If I don't， they'll accuse me！ I have to think of myself and my family！Do ye see that？’
　　‘Aye，’ said Alan slowly．‘I see that．’
　　‘And I'll have to accuse your friend from the Lowlands too．Ye see that， Alan— say that ye see that！’
　　Alan's face went red．‘It's hard on me， James！ I brought him here， and now my friends accuse him of murder！’
　　‘But just think，Alan，man！’cried James．‘The Campbells will be sure to accuse him． And I have children！’
　　‘Well，sir，’ said Alan， turning to me，‘what do ye say？ If ye do not agree，I won't let James do it．’
　　‘I cannot understand why we don't accuse the man who did kill Campbell，’ I replied sharply，‘but accuse me， Mr Stewart，if you like，accuse Alan，accuse King George！I am Alan's friend， and if I can help his friends in any way， I don't mind the danger．’
　　So that night we started our long journey to the Lowlands．Sometimes we walked， and sometimes we ran． But although we travelled as fast as we could，daylight began to appear before we had found a good hiding－place． We were in the rocky valley of Glencoe， with high mountains on both sides，and a river running fast through the middle． Alan was clearly worried．‘The soldiers will find us easily here，’ he said． He looked around，and saw a great rock，about seven metres high． With difficulty we both climbed to the top of it． Then I saw why he had chosen it． The top of the rock was shaped like a plate， and there was room for two or three men to lie there，hidden from people in the valley．
　　At last Alan smiled．‘Aye，’ he said．‘Now we have a chance． Ye can sleep for a while． I'll watch for soldiers．’
　　But when I woke up， several hours later， the valley was full of redcoats， and Alan was looking worried again， ‘If they go up the sides of the mountains，they'll see us，’he said．‘We'll just have to stay here and hope they don't， When it's dark，we'll try to get past them．’
　　That was a terrible day． We lay on the rock， baking in the sun， with no water，only whisky， to drink． We could hear the English voices of the soldiers all around us， but luckily they did not look up at our rock． In the afternoon， when the soldiers seemed sleepy after their lunch， we decided to try to escape， and we climbed very quietly down from the rock． The soldiers did not notice us as we moved carefully from rock to rock， and soon we were safely in the next valley． That evening we washed ourselves in the river， and ate cold porridge， which is a good meal for a hungry man．
　　We continued walking eastwards all night， over the great dark mountains． Alan was very pleased that we had left the soldiers behind， and whistled happily as he walked．
　　Before daylight we reached a cave that Alan had used before， and here we stayed hidden for five days． Alan went down one night to the nearest village， to the housc of one of his clansmen． He sent this man to James Stewart， to tell him where we were hiding， and after three days the clansman re turned， with a purse of money for us and a message from Mrs Stewart． We discovered that James was already in prison， ac cused of murder， although people were saying that Alan Breck had actually fired the shot． And there was a price of one hun dred pounds on my head， as well as on Alan's．
　　I began to think that I would be safer alone． Alan was very recognizable in his fine French clothes． It was going to be dan gerous to stay with Alan， and expensive， too． Mrs Stewart had only managed to send five pounds， and Alan had to travel as far as France． But I still had two pounds， and only needed to reach Queensferry， so I would have to give some of my money to Alan． Staying with Alan meant both danger and ex pense．
　　But my honest friend did not think in this way at all． He felt sure that he was helping me． So what could I do， except keep quiet， and hope that everything would be all right？
　　We started travelling again， across the mountains， and by daylight came to wild， open moors， covered with purple heather．Because anyone on the hills around us could easily see us when we stood up， we had to walk or run on our hands and feet， like animals It was another hot summer day， and my back achcd badly after a few hours． I wanted a rest and a drink of water， but when we stopped， we saw the redcoats of soldiers on one of the hills， and we had to go on．
　　We walked or ran all day and all night． People who talk of tiredness do not know what the word really means， I did not know who I was or where I was going， and I did not care． I thought that every step would be my last， and I hoped that death would come soon．Alan drove me onwards， and I felt that I hated him， but I was too afraid of him to stop and rest．
　　When daylight returned， we were stupid with tiredness，and had become careless． Suddenly， three or four wild－looking men jumped out of the heather， and took us prisoner．I was not afraid， only happy to stop running for a moment． But Alan spoke to them in Gaelic．
　　‘These are Cluny Macpherson's men，’ he said quietly to me．‘Ye remember him， the head of the Macpherson clan？They fought well against the English in the Forty-Five．After that， he didn't go to France， like the other clan chiefs．No，he's been hiding here ever since， and the soldiers have never managed to find him． His clansmen bring him what he needs．’
　　We were taken to a cave， well hidden by trees and rocks，and Cluny Macpherson himself came forward to welcome us，like a king in his palace． He seemed to live well in his cave，and he offered us an excellent meal， prepared by his cook． But I was too tired to eat， so I lay down at once and slept． In fact，although I did not know it， I was seriously ill， and could not get up for two days．
　　I woke up once，in a kind of fog， to find Cluny and Alan playing cards， and a second time， to hear Alan asking to borrow my money． I was too sick and sleepy to refuse， and gave him my purse．
　　But when I woke up again， on the third day，I felt much better， although not very strong． I noticed that Alan was looking very ashamed， and I realized at once what had hap pened．
　　‘David，’ he said miserably，‘I've lost all our money at cards， yours as well as mine．’
　　‘No，no，ye haven't lost it！cried Cluny．‘Of course I'll give your money back． It was just a game． I wouldn't keep your money． Here！’ And he pulled gold coins out of his pocket．
　　I did not know if it was right to accept the money or not，but we needed it， so I thanked Cluny and put the coins in my purse． But I was very angry with Alan， and as we left Cluny's cave and continued our journey， I refused to speak to him．
　　At first Alan tried hard to talk to me． He said that he was sorry， and that he loved me like a brother． He was worried about my health， and offered me a hand when we crossed a river or climbed a hill．But after two or three days，when he realized that I was still angry with him， he too became angry，and laughed at me when I fell， or seemed tired．
　　We travelled by night， through endless rain and strong winds， and slept in the wet heather by day． I was feeling more and more miserable．My illness had returned， and I was beginning to think that this terrible journey would only end in my death．‘Alan will be sorry when I die！’ I thought． How childish I was！
　　Alan continued to laugh at me and call me names， and by the sixth night I had had enough．I stopped and spoke angrily to him ．‘Mr Stewart，’ I said， ‘why do you laugh at me？I should laugh at you！ You may have a king's name， but you're a loser！ You spend your life running away！ You're not brave enough to fight the Campbells and the English， and win！’
　　Alan looked sharply at me．‘David！’ he said．‘There are things that ye should never say—things that can never be for gotten！’
　　‘If you don't like what I say， I'm ready to fight，’ I answered stupidly． I knew that I was not strong enough to hold a sword．
　　‘David！’ he cried．‘Are ye crazy？ I cannot fight ye！ It would be murder！’ He pulled out his sword， and looked at me．‘No， I can't， I can't，’ he said． And he dropped his sword on the ground．
　　When I saw how much he loved me， I was no longer angry，only sick， and sorry．I remembered all his kindness to me，and how he had always helped me through difficult times．Now I had lost that friend for ever！ My illness seemed to get worse and worse， and I could only just stand． I wanted to say that I was sorry， but I knew it was too late for that． Suddenly I realized that a cry for help was the only way of bringing Alan back to me．
　　‘Alan！’ I said， my voice shaking．‘If you cannot help me，I must just die here！’I did not need to pretend．
　　He looked up quickly， surprised．‘Can ye walk？’
　　‘Not without help．Alan，if I die，will you forget what I said？In my heart，I've always been your friend，you know that．’
　　‘ Quiet！’ cried Alan．‘ Don't talk of dying！ David， man， ye know… ’He could not go on， but put his arm around me．‘Davie， I'm a bad friend to ye．
　　I didn't remember that ye're just a bairn， I couldn't see that ye were dying on your feet…’He was almost crying．‘Hold on to me， Davie， and ye'll be grand．’
　　He helped me down into the valley to the nearest house，which luckily belonged to a clan who were friendly to the Stewarts． There I lay for several days， unable to move． Alan refused to leave me， and took the greatest care of me． Little by little I got better， with his help， and before a month had passed， we went on our way again．
　　This time we did not argue． We did not see any more soldiers， and our journey was easier now． We walked through the warm summer nights， ate our porridge， drank our whisky， and slept in the dry heather in the daytime．Now that we were in the Lowlands， we were almost safe， and we both felt happy and hopeful．When we crossed the Forth River by boat from Limekilns， we were only five kilometres from Queensferry， where Mr Rankeillor lived．






■ 5 David comes home
　　We decided that Alan would stay hidden in the fields，while I walked to Queensferry to find Mr Rankeillor．Alan promised not to come out until he heard me return． In order to be sure that it was me， he taught me to whistle a little Gaelic song．I have never forgotten it．I think that it will run in my head when I lie dying． Every time it comes to me， I think of that last day of my travels， with Alan whistling oppo site me in the grass， while the first light of the sun touched his face．
　　Soon I arrived in Queensferry．When I saw people looking strangely at me， and realized how dirty my clothes were， I be gan to feel afraid． Would Mr Rankeillor want to talk to me？How could I prove who I was？ I had no papers with me． I was too ashamed to ask any of the townspeople for help，so I walked up and down，not knowing what to do．
　　By midday I was tired and hungry．I stopped in front of a large house， with clean windows， flowers in the garden， and a dog sitting on the doorstep．
　　Suddenly the door opened，and a large， well-dressed， kind-looking man came out．
　　‘What are you doing here， my lad？’ he asked．
　　‘I'm looking for Mr Rankeillor's house，sir，’I answered．
　　‘ Well， I'm Rankeillor，and this is my house．
　　Who are you？’
　　‘My name is David Balfour，’ I replled．
　　‘David Balfour？’ he repeated， and looked closely at me．‘Come inside，Mr Balfour，and we'll talk．’
　　In Mr Rankeillor's comfortable sitting－room， I told him the story of my early life， and explained that my uncle had paid Captain Hoseason to kidnap me and take me to sea．
　　The lawyer listened carefully．‘I heard that Hoseason's ship went down near the island of Mull two months ago，’ he said．
　　‘What have you been doing since then？’
　　‘I can easily tell you， sir， I replied，‘but if I tell you， a friend's life may be in danger． Promise me that you will not get him into trouble， or tell the soldiers about him！’
　　Although he looked a little worried at first， he promised，and I told him the rest of my adventures While I talked， his eyes were closed and he seemed to be asleep， but I discovered soon afterwards that he had understood and remennbered everything．
　　Whem O spoke the name of Alan Breck， he opened his eyes and sat up．‘Don't use unnecessary names， Mr Balfour， ’ he said．‘A lawyer has to be very careful， when discussing High landers．I don't think I heard your friend's name very well．Let's call him— Mr Thomson．’
　　‘Of course，’ I thought，‘all over Scotland people are talk ing about Alan， now that he's accused of the murder of Colin Campbell．’ I was sure that Rankeillor had recognized his name． But I just smiled， and continued my story， using the name of Mr Thomson instead of Alan Breck． ‘Well， well，’ said the lawyer， when I had finished，‘ what an exciting adventure！ You will have to write it down one day！ I had heard of you，Mr David，from your friends in Essendean， who wrote to me when they had no word from you． Your uncle then told me that he had given you money to study in Europe， but I did not think that was true． I'm afraid we all know that Ebenezer Balfour is not a very good or honest man！ Then Captain Hoseason appeared， saying that you were lost when his ship went down． But now I understand what really happened， and I know that you are David Balfour．’ He put a hand on my shoulder in a fatherly way and continued．‘You'll want to know about the house of Shaws．It's a strange story． When they were young， your father Alexander and his younger brother Ebenezer loved the same girl． Your father was always a kind， loving brother， so when the girl decided to marry him， Alexander left Cramond and let Ebenezer have the house and farmland． Well， I think it was a bad mistake． What happened was that your parents were always very poor，and Ebenezer became more and more interested in money． He never married，of course．’
　　‘Well， sir，’I said，‘ and now， what will happen？’
　　‘Now that your father is dead，’ replied the lawyer，‘you own the house of Shaws and the farms around it． But Ebenezer won't accept that， and it will be expensive if he wants us to prove it in court．In fact，we must stay out of court，if possible．The kidnapping will be difficult to prove，and we don't want people asking questions abut your friend Mr Thomson． No， I think that we should leave Ebenezer at Shaws， where he's been for twenty－five years， and ask him to pay you some money everyyear， instead of giving you the house．What do you think？’
　　‘That sounds excellent to me， sir，’ I replied．‘ But I think that we could accuse my uncle of kidnapping me． It's easier to prove than you think．Listen，’and I described my plan to him．
　　He was very pleased with it．‘Yes， Mr David， very good！If we can catch Ebenezer like that， he can't refuse to give you some of the money that belongs to you！’ He called to his sec retary， Torrance． ‘You must come with us tonight，Torrance． You'll have to listen to the conversation you hear，and write it all down． And bring the Balfour papers with you．’ Then he turned to me．‘But if I accept your plan， Mr David， I'll have to meet your friend Mr Thomson， who may be，I only say may be，a criminal．’He was silent for a while，thinking deeply， then went on，‘Well， let's talk of something different． Do you know， the other day， I saw Torrance in the street？But because I wasn't wearing my glasses，I didn't recognize him！ My own secretary！ Ha－ha－ha！’ and he laughed happily at himself．
　　I smiled politely．‘Perhaps he's getting old，’I thought．
　　But later that evening， when Mr Rankeillor， Torrance and I were walking out of Queensferry，the lawyer suddenly cried out， laughing，‘Well， how stupid of me！ I've forgotten my glasses！’And I understood why he had told met he story about Torrance． Now he could meet Alan， a man wanted for murder， and if the soldiers asked him later for information he could say that he never saw Alan clearly and could not possibly recognize him．
　　When we arrived near Alan's hiding－place， I whistled the little Highland song． When he appeared， we explained to him what we wanted him to do， and he readily agreed．
　　So the four of us continued walking until we reached the house of Shaws．
　　It was a dark night， and there were no lights in the windows． My uncle was probably in bed． Mr Rankeillor，Torrance and I hid below the steps， near enough to hear any conversation， while Alan went straight up to the door and knocked loudly． After some time my uncle opened his bedroom window， and called down， in a frightened voice，‘ What do ye want at this time of night？ Who are ye？’
　　‘I do not want to give ye my own name，’ replied Alan，‘but I've come to talk to ye about someone called—David．’
　　‘What！’ cried my uncle． And after a moment， he said un happily，‘Will ye come inside， to discuss—the matter？’
　　‘I will not，’ said Alan sharply．‘It's here on this doorstep that we must talk．
　　Come down and speak to me．’
　　After Ebenezer had thought about it， he decided to do what Alan wanted． It took him a long time to come downstairs， and a longer time to unlock the heavr door，but at last we saw him in the doorway， holding his gun in his shaking hands．
　　‘ Now，’ said Alan，‘ye're intelligent enough to see that I'm a Highlander． I have friends who live near the island of Mull．Well， it seems that a ship went down near there， and soon afterwards my friends found a lad， half－dead， on the beach．Your nephew， Mr Balfour． Since then they've been taking care of him． And now they'd like to know， Mr Balfour， if ye want him back． Ye'll have to pay， if ye do． My friends are very poor．
　　‘I don't want him back，’ said my uncle．‘He wasn't a good lad． I won't pay a shilling for him！’
　　‘Blood's thicker than water， sir，’ said Alan．‘He's your brother's son！ But if ye don't want him back， will ye pay us to keep him？ And ye'll have to hurry． I'm not waiting here all night！’
　　‘Give me a minute to think， will ye？’ cried my uncle．
　　‘In two words， sir， do ye want us to kill or keep the lad？’
　　‘Oh，sir！’ cried Ebenezer．‘Don't talk of killing！’
　　‘Well， killing's easier， and quicker， and cheaper．’
　　‘I'm an honest man，’ said my uncle，‘and no murderer．’
　　‘ Well， well，’ replied Alan，‘ and now how much will ye pay for us to keep him？ First I need to know how much ye paid Hoseason to kidnap the lad．How much was it？’
　　‘Hoseason？ Kidnap？ What are ye talking about， man？’ screamed my uncle， jumping up and down on the doorstep．
　　‘Hoseason himself has told me about it，’ said Alan calmly，‘so ye needn't pretend．Just answer the question，or ye'll find my sword in your stomach！’
　　‘Don't get angry！’ cried my uncle．‘I gave him twenty pounds， that's all． But to be honest with ye—he was going to sell the lad as a slave， and keep that money，ye see．’
　　‘ Thankyou， Mr Thomson，that's excellent，’ saidthe lawyer，stepping forward．‘Good evening，Mr Balfour，’
　　he said politely to the old man．
　　And，‘Good evening， uncle Ebenezer， ’ said I．
　　And，‘It's a grand evening， Mr Balfour，’ added Torrance．
　　My uncle said nothing， but stood there on the doorstep with his mouth open． We took him into the kitchen， and sat down to discuss matters． After an hour， it was all decided． My uncle accepted that Shaws belonged to me， but he would stay there during his lifetime． He agreed to pay me money every year，and Mr Rankeillor would check that he did．
　　We all stayed that night at the house of Shaws． But while Alan and Torrance and Mr Rankeillor slept on the hard beds upstairs， I lay down on the kitchen chests，which now belonged to me． I， who had slept out on the hills for so many days and nights， was now the owner of a large house and several farms．
　　My head was full of exciting plans and ideas，and I found it difficult to sleep．
　　The next day， while Mr Rankeillor and I were having breakfast together， I talked to him about Alan．
　　‘Mr Thomson is still in danger，’ said the lawyer．‘He must leave the country as soon as possible， and stay with his friends in France for a while． I'll give you money to buy him a place on a ship． He'll have to stay hidden until then．’
　　‘And his clansman， James Stewart， who's in prison？’ I asked．‘I know he didn't kill Colin Campbell． I saw the mur derer！ I must speak for James Stewart in court！’
　　‘My dear boy，’ said Rankeillor，‘it's dangerous for anyone to speak for a Stewart in Campbell court． But you must do what you think is right． I'll write you a letter to a good lawyer who will be able to help Mr Thomson's clansman．’ He stood up．‘Well， I think that we've finished our business here． I must leave now，and go back to my work．
　　Come and see me often， Mr David！ Goodbye！’
　　Alan and I started walking towards Edlnburgh，while Mr Rankeillor and Torrance turned back to Queensferry． we talked about what would happen next． Alan was going to hide in the countryside near Edinburgh， until it was safe for him to take a ship to France．
　　When I had found him a place，I would send him a message． Then I planned to go back to the High lands to help James Stewart return to his family．
　　Alan and I walked slowly． We were both thinking that soon we would have to leave each other． And we had been through so much together！We stopped when we came to the top of the Corstorphine Hill， and looked down at Edinburgh． We knew that this was the moment to say goodbye， but we stood there silently for a while．
　　‘Well， goodbye，’ said Alan， and held out his hand．
　　‘ Goodbye，’I said， and took his hand．
　　Then I went off down hill．I did not look back at him，but I felt very miserable， and wanted to sit down and cry like a baby．
　　Edinburgh was full of noise and traffic and people， but I did not notice any of that． All the time I was thinking of Alan on the hill， and there was an ice-cold feeling inside me．
　　In the months that followed， I kept Alan's silver button safe and often looked at it， remembering our escape through the heather in the wild Highlands． I felt proud to call Alan Breck Stewart my friend， and wondered if I would ever see him again．When I returned to the Highlands to help his clansman， James，I found that my adventures with the Stewarts were far from finished… but that is another story．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Chemical Secret by Tim Vicary





■ 1 A new start
　　'Mr Duncan？Come in please．Mr Wilson will see you now．'
　　'Thank you．'John Duncan stood up and walked nervously towards the door．He was a tall，thin man，about forty-five years old，in an old grey suit．It was his best suit，but it was ten years old now．He had grey hair and glasses．His face looked sad and tired．
　　Inside the room，a man stood up to welcome him．Mr Duncan？Pleased to meet you．My name's David Wilson．This is one of our chemists，Mary Carter．'
　　John Duncan shook hands with both of them，and sat down．It was a big office，with a thick carpet on the floor and beautiful pictures on the walls．David Wilson was a young man，in an expensive black suit．He had a big gold ring on one finger．He smiled at John．
　　'I asked Miss Carter to come because she's one of our best Chemists．She discovered our wonderful new paint，in fact．When…I mean，if you come to work here， you will work with her．'
　　'Oh，I see．'John looked at Mary．She was older than Wil-son—about thirty-five，perhaps—with short brown hair，and a pretty，friendly face．She was wearing a white coat with a lot of pens in the top pocket．She smiled at him kindly， but John felt miserable．
　　I'll never get this job，he thought．I'm too old！Employers want younger people these days．
　　David Wilson was looking at some papers．'Now，Mr Dun-can，'he said，'I see that you are a very good biologist．You worked at a university…and then for two very famous com-panies．But…you stopped working as a biologist nine years ago．Why was that？'
　　'I've always had two interests in my life，'John said，'biol-ogy and boats．My wife was a famous sailor…Rachel Hors-ley…Perhaps you remember her．She sailed around the world alone in a small boat．'
　　'Yes，'said David Wilson，'I remember her．'
　　'So we started a business，'said John．'We made small boats together，and sold them．'
　　'And did the business go well？'asked Wilson．
　　'Very well at first．Then we wanted to build bigger，better boats．We borrowed too much money．And then my wife…'John stopped speaking．
　　'Yes，the Sevens Race．I remember now，'said David Wil-son．
　　Both men were silent for a moment．Wilson remembered the newspaper reports of the storm and the lives lost at sea．He looked at the man who sat sadly in front of him．
　　'So，after my wife died，'continued John，' I closed the business．That was five years ago．'
　　'I see，'said David Wilson．'It's a hard world，the world of business．'He looked at John's old grey suit．'So now you want a job as a biologist．Well，this is a chemical company，Mr Duncan．We make paint．But we need a biologist to make sure that everything in this factory is safe．We want someone to tell the government that it's safe to work here，and that it's safe to have a paint factory near the town．That's impor-tant to us．'
　　'And if something's not safe，then of course we'll change it，'mary Carter said．David Wilson looked at her，but he didn't say anything．
　　'Yes，I see，'John began nervously．'Well，I think I could do that．I mean，when I worked for Harper Chemicals in Lon-don I…'He talked for two or three minutes about his work．David Wilson listened，but he didn't say anything．Ihen he smiled．It was a cold，hard smile，and it made John feel un-comfortable．He remembered his old suit and grey hair，and he wished he hadn't come．
　　'You really need this job，don't you，Mr Duncan？'david Wilson said．'You need it a lot．'
　　'Yes，I do，'he said quietly．But he thought：I hate you，Wilson．You're enjoying this．You like making people feel small．I hate people like you．
　　Wilson's smile grew bigger．He stood up， and held out his hand．'OK，'he said．'When can you start？'
　　'What？'John was very surprised．'What did you say？'
　　'I said，“When can you start？”，Mr Duncan．We need you in our factory as soon as possible．Will Monday be OK？'
　　'You mean I've got the job？'
　　'Of course．Congratulations！'Wilson shook John's hand．'My secretary will tell you about your pay．You'll have your own office，and a company car，of course．I'd like you to start work with Mary on Monday．Is that OK？'
　　'I…Yes，yes，of course．That's fine．Thank you，thank you very much．'






■ 2 At home
　　'Hi，Dad．Your supper's in the kitchen．'
　　John's sixteen-year-old daughter，Christine，was sitting at the table doing her homework．His son Andrew，who was thirteen，was watching television．
　　'Thanks，Christine，'John said．'I'm sorry I'm late．Is everything OK？'
　　'Fine，thanks．'Christine gave him a quick smile，then con-tinued with her work．John got his food from the kitchen．Fried fish and chips．The food was dry and didn't taste very good．But he didn't say anything about that．John was not a good cook himself and his children were no better．His wife had been a good cook，he remembered．
　　John tried to eat the terrible supper and looked around the small，miserable flat．The furniture was twenty years old，the wallpaper and carpets were cheap and dirty．The rooms were all small，and he could see no trees or gardens from the win-dows—just the lights from hundreds of other flats．And there were books，clothes，and newspapers on the floor．
　　Once，when his wife had been alive， he had had a fine house．A beautiful big house in the country，with a large gar-den．They had had lots of new furniture，two cars，expensive holidays—everything they needed．He had had a good job；they hadn't needed to think about money．And then he had started the boat-building company，and his luck had ended．
　　When Rachel had died，John had been terribly unhappy—much too unhappy to think about business．A few months later his company had closed，and he had lost all his money．John had had to sell his beautiful house in the country，and move to this miserable flat．
　　And for the last two years， he hadn't had a job at all．He was a poor man，and an unlucky one， too．He had tried for lots of jobs，and got none of them．There were too many bright young biologists．But now that was all going to change．He looked at his daughter and smiled．
　　'Did you have a good day at school，Christine？'he asked her．
　　'Oh，all right，I suppose，'she said．She didn't look very happy．'I've got a letter for you．'
　　She pushed the letter across the table，and he opened it．It was from her school．One of the teachers was taking the chil-dren on a skiing holiday to the mountains in Switzerland．It cost ￡ 400 for ten days．Parents who wanted their children to go had to send the money to the school before February 25th．
　　John's smile grew bigger．'Do you want to go on this holi-day，Christine？'he asked．
　　She looked at him strangely．'Of course I do， Dad，'she said．'But I can't，can I？We haven't got ￡ 400．'
　　'No，I suppose not．'He looked at her carefully through his thick glasses．She was a clever，strong girl—good at her schoolwork，good at sports．But she had never been skiing；John hadn't had enough money．
　　'Are your friends going？'he asked her．
　　'Some of them，yes．Miranda，Jane， Nigel—the rich ones，you know．But they often go skiing；it's easy for them．I know I can't go， Dad．Throw the letter away．'
　　John looked at her，and felt his heart beating quickly．'No，don't do that，Christine，'he said．'Perhaps you can go，if you want to．Why not？'
　　Christine laughed．'What's happened， Dad？Have you robbed a bank or something？'
　　John stood up．He went into the kitchen and got himself a drink．'No，'he said，when he came back．'But something interesting happened today．Put your homework away，Chris-tine—and turn that TV off，Andrew．I've got something to tell you．'
　　'Oh，not now，Dad！'said Andrew．'This is an exciting story．'
　　John smiled．'I've got an exciting story，too，Andrew．Come and listen．'
　　John Duncan's children lived in an old，untidy flat， they had no money，and they often ate awful food．Bux they could still talk to their father．So Andrew turned off the TV，and sat down in a big armchair beside his father and Christine．
　　The story didn't sound very exciting at first．'I went to a factory today，'John said．'That paint factory by the river．No，wait，Andrew．Paint factories can be very exciting．They gave me a job there．I'm going to have my own office， a big car，lots of money—in fact， we're going to be rich…！'






■ 3 Rich man
　　John Duncan started work on Monday，and Mary Carter showed him round the factory．The most important thing that the company produced was a new paint for cars．It was a very strong，hard paint，which nothing could damage．Mary and her chemists had developed it，and they had tested it all over the world．Neither acid nor salt water could damage it，and cars came back from both the Arctic and the Sahara looking like new．
　　The company was beginning to make a lot of money from this paint，and it had brought four hundred new jobs to the town．
　　One day，when he was working with the paint，John spilt some of the waste products on his leg．He cleaned it off quickly，but it left a red，painful place on his skin，which would not go away．It kept him awake at night．He told his doctor what he had spilt on it，and the doctor looked at him strangely．
　　'So these chemicals had something to do with the new paint，did they？'the doctor asked carefully．
　　'Yes，I told you．It was a bottle of the waste products．I was looking at them in my office．'
　　'I see．'the doctor looked out of the window thoughtfully．His fingers moved quietly on his desk．'And your company is producing a lot of these waste products now，I suppose．'
　　'Yes，of course．'John was in a hurry． He had to meet someone important in ten minutes．'Look，can you give me something to put on it，or not？'
　　'Oh yes．'the doctor began to write something on a piece of paper．'Put this on night and morning，and the pain will go in a day or two．But I'm afraid the skin there will stay red for a year or two．They're nasty chemicals，Mr Duncan，you know．'
　　'Yes，I know．'John smiled at him．'But don't worry，Doctor，we're very careful with them in the factory．No one can go near them without special safe clothing．You can come and see if you like．'
　　'I'm very pleased to hear it，'said the doctor．He gave the piece of paper to John．
　　'Thank you，'said John．He went towards the door．
　　'Mr Duncan？'
　　'Yes？'John looked back，surprised．
　　'Where do these waste products go，when the factory has finished with them？Into the river？'
　　'Well，yes，of course，'said John．'But it's all right，you know，'he added quickly．'It's very carefully checked，all the time．It's a big river，and we only produce a few hundred litres of the waste products a day．And we're only two kilo-metres from the sea，after all．'
　　'Good，'said the doctor．'I wouldn't want anyone to drink those waste products，that's all．'
　　'They won't，doctor，'said John．'All the drinking water comes out of the river five kilometres upstream，you know that．Who's going to drink salt water from the river mouth，for heaven's sake？Chemists from London have checked it，too，you know，and our company lawyers know all about it．So it's not dangerous and we're not doing anything wrong．Don't worry about it．'
　　He went out of the door， and after half an hour he had for-gotten the conversation．
　　He was a very busy man now．All day he had to test differ-ent types of paints，and make sure they were safe．He was also busy buying a big， comfortable house for his family， with a large field beside it，where Christine could keep a horse．The house was half a kilometre from the sea，and its gardens went down to the river．There was an empty boathouse there．
　　'Can we have a boat， Dad？'Andrew asked．'I mean，not now，of course，but one day—when you've finished paying for the house， perhaps？'
　　John laughed．His children had been poor for so long．But now he could buy them anything they wanted．
　　'You can have a boat now，if you want，my son，'he said happily．'If I can afford a big house like this，I can certainly afford a small boat．We'll go fishing every week，shall we？And I'll teach you both to sail in the evenings．I've always wanted to do that，you know．'
　　He could not believe how lucky he was．He had a good job at last，a fine home， and his children had everything they wanted．He only wished his wife，Rachel，was alive to enjoy it with him．There was only one thing that he could not give his children now．He could not give them back their mother．






■ 4 The seals
　　A few months later，John invited Mary to a meal in the new house．It was a difficult evening．He had never invited anyone to their old flat，and the children's friends nev-er came for meals．The new house was very untidy，and John was nervous about the food．He and Christine cooked a chick-en because they thought it was easy．But the chicken was tasteless and the rice was too soft．
　　Mary smiled，and pretended not to notice．But the evening went badly．Christine was angry with her because she tidied up the kitchen，and Andrew was angry with her because she didn't want to watch TV．Both the children went to bed early，and thought about their mother．
　　But Mary came again，on a Sunday，and John took them all out in their new boat．That was much better．Mary didn't know how to sail，so the children had to tell her what to do．She did what she was told，and seemed to be happy．John sat at the back of the boat，and watched his children quietly．He felt proud of them， and he thought they were proud of him too．The first time Mary and the children laughed together，John felt a big smile come onto his face．
　　It was a beautiful，sunny day in the middle of May．There was a good wind，and the sailing was fun．The boat sailed fast，over small，white-topped waves．The sky was blue and clear．They sailed down to the mouth of the river，where there were lots of small islands and sandbanks．
　　'Look，Dad，quick！Over there！What are they？'
　　Andrew pointed excitedly to one of the long，low sandbanks．
　　'Seals，'said John．'Haven't you seen them before？'
　　'No，'said Andrew．'Only in films．Not in real life．'His face was shining，excited，happy．'Do they really live here？'
　　'Yes．It's a group of seal families．The mothers come here every year to have their babies．'
　　They sailed closer to the sandbank，until they were only about twenty metres away from the seals． Wet，shiny seal mothers lifted their heads and looked at them with their blue eyes．The baby seals were drinking milk from their mothers，climbing over them， and playing in the shallow water． Then a big father seal lifted his head and stared angrily at them．
　　'I think they're beautiful，'said Mary．'I never knew they lived here， so close to the town． It makes me feel really happy，just to see them．'
　　'Yes，it does，doesn't it，'said Christine．'I think nothing can be really wrong with the world， if they can live here，all by themselves，with no one looking after them．'
　　'Yes，'said Mary．'And they're really beautiful，too．Look！Did you see that little one， playing on his mother's back？ I wish I could do that！'
　　John smiled，as he watched Mary and his children laughing and talking together．He thought the world was a good place，too．






■ 5 The new experiment
　　A few days later，John asked Mary to look at another experiment．He took her into a long，quiet room at the back of the factory．The room was full of the noises of small animals．
　　'I've been testing the waste products，'he said．'Here，look at this．'He gave her a sheet of paper．'Some of these rats have had the waste products in their food and drinking water．There's no real problem yet． One or two have become ill，but not many．There's nothing very serious．'
　　Mary read the results carefully．She didn't like this kind of experiment，but she knew it was necessary． And John was right；no rats had died，and not very many were ill．
　　'So what do you want to show me？'she asked．
　　'This，'he said．He opened a box by the window．'These ten rats have had the waste products in their drinking water for two weeks now． I gave them a lot—five parts per million．They're going to have babies today．If the babies are OK， we've got nothing to worry about．'
　　'Oh，John，'she said．'What an awful thing to do！'
　　'I know，I know，'he said． But he wasn't listening．'Look，'he said excitedly．'Some of them have been born al-ready！'
　　He lifted some of the baby rats out of the box and looked at them through a magnifying glass．
　　'Oh dear，'he said at last， sadly．Perhaps there is a prob-lem．Look！'
　　Mary looked through the magnifying glass．She began to feel ill．There was a long silence．
　　'There certainly is a problem！'mary's voice sounded loud and high in the quiet room．She stared at the small animals under the magnifying glass．'Baby rats with no eyes，no ears，six leqs！Oh John！John！What have you done？'
　　He looked at her strangely．'It's awful，isn't it？But I had to know． And remember， Mary—their mothers have had five parts per million of these chemicals in their drinking water for two weeks．That's a lot—much，much more than we're putting in the river．'
　　Mary looked away from the rats．She remembered the beau-tiful afternoon that they had spent with John's children，sail-ing on the clear blue water．'John，these waste products are dangerous！'she said．'We've got to stop putting them in the river！'
　　'Of course，of course．'John put his hand on her arm， to comfort her．But it was the same hand—the hand that had held the rats．'Of course we'll stop it，if we need to，Mary．The company can build machines to clean the waste products．I'll start my report for David Wilson next week．'
　　'But…'she turned round to face him．His hand fell from her arm．'Don't you think we should stop making the paint now，John？Perhaps it'll take years to build those machines，and we're putting the chemicals into the river right now！'
　　A shadow crossed his face．His eyes looked at hers，then away， out of the window．
　　'I… don't think we need to do that now，Mary． We're putting very little into the river at the moment．And the com-pany will build those machines，won't they？'
　　She remembered her long years of work，the hundreds of unsuccessful experiments．She touched his hand，and smiled．'I hope so，John，'she said．'I really hope so．'
　　She turned，and went quickly out of the room．






■ 6 The report
　　John 's report took longer than he had thought．It was nearly six weeks later when he went to discuss the re-suits with David Wilson．
　　Mr Wilson wasn't a scientist．He was a businessman．He knew how to run a business， how to make money．
　　'Thanks for coming，John．'david Wilson came out from behind his desk and shook hands with John．They sat in two big，comfortable armchairs by the window．
　　David Wilson's office was large，with a thick carpet and beautiful pictures on the walls． From the window，John could see the river，and the woods and fields on the other side． He felt comfortable，happy，safe．
　　'I've read your report，'Wilson began．Then he stopped，and lit a cigarette．'Not very good，is it？'
　　'What？'John stared at him in surprise．
　　Wilson smiled，and moved his hand through the clouds of smoke．'No，no， don't worry—I don't mean the report is bad，of course not．You've worked very hard，and done your job well． What I mean is，I don't like the ideas at the end of the report．'
　　'What's wrong with them？'
　　'They're too expensive．'the two men stared at each other for a moment，and John felt cold and sick in his stomach．Wilson smiled， but it wasn't the kind of smile that John liked．
　　'Look，John，'he said．'Your report says that we should build some new machines to clean up the waste products before they go into the river， right？And those machines will cost two million pounds！Where do you think we can find all that？Money doesn't grow on trees，you know！'
　　'No，of course not．'John's mouth was dry．He took a drink of water，and felt his hand shaking．'But we're selling a lot of the new paint．We're making millions of pounds every month from that，aren't we？'
　　'We're doing very well， yes，'said Wilson．'But if we spend two million pounds to build these new machines，the paint will have to cost more， and we won't sell so much．'
　　'But—we've got to do it，'said John．'These waste prod-ucts are much more dangerous than I'd thought．Didn't you read that in my report？When I put the chemicals in rats'drinking water，some of the baby rats were born without eyes and ears． One didn't have any legs， and one had six．'He shivered．'And some were born without legs when they drank only two parts per million．We can't put those chemicals in the river．'
　　'Of course I read that，John．I read your report very care-fully indeed．And your report also says that on most days we put less than two parts per million into the river．No，wait，listen to me for a minute！We both know that no drinking wa-ter comes out of this part of the river，don't we？ And in two kilometres the river goes out into the sea．So why is it danger-ous？Nobody is ever going to drink it，John！We don't need to build these new machines！'
　　John thought of his children， sailing on the river in their boat．He thought of the seals，and people fishing， and little children playing on the beach and swimming．'We've got to build them！'he said．
　　David Wilson looked at him carefully． His voice，when he spoke，was very quiet and hard．'Listen to me，John．You're a very good scientist，and we're lucky to have you in this com-pany．But you're not a businessman， and I am．Look at this．'He picked up a sheet of paper， and held it across the table for John to see．It showed how much money the compa-ny had．'We borrowed ten million pounds last year， and we employed four hundred more people．Think how much that means to a small town like this！'
　　'I know，'said John．'But…'
　　'Just a minute．Listen to me．If we build these cleaning machines of yours，people will lose their jobs—a lot of people！This company can't afford to borrow any more money，John．We just can't do it！'
　　John stood up．'And what happens if people get ill because of this？ Have you thought of that？What will the newspapers say then？'
　　'No one will get ill，because no one drinks that water，John．The newspapers will never know about it．'
　　'They will if I tell them．'
　　There was a long silence．Then David Wilson stood up． He walked past John Duncan，without looking at him， and sat down behind his desk．When he looked up，his eyes were cold and grey，like stones from the beach．
　　'If you do that， John， I shall say you're a liar．You'll lose your job．You'll have to sell your house， and go back to living in a nasty little flat． You'll never get another job， and you'll never have a house or any money again． You'll just be an old man， walking the streets without friends or money． Is that what you want？'
　　John didn't answer．He stood for a long time， and stared at David Wilson， and didn't say a word．After nearly two min-utes，Wilson smiled—a thin quiet smile．
　　'But if you stay with us，you will be paid twice as much next year．And no one will ever be hurt， because no one will ever drink that water．'
　　He got up from his desk， came round to the front，and held out his hand． John stood still for a long moment． Then he shook hands．
　　'Think about it，John，'said David Wilson．
　　John Duncan turned，and walked slowly towards the door．






■ 7 Christine and Simon
　　Mary talked to Mr Wilson too，but it was no good． She came out looking tired and very sad．
　　For many months she argued with David Wilson about the danger of the waste products， but he would not listen to her．And so， eighteen months after John's report， Mary decided to move to another company．she was pleased， because it was a more important job，but that wasn't the reason she was going．She knew that the cleaning machines would never be built．
　　John was sad to see her go． He had enjoyed working with her， and she had come to his house several times over the last year and a half． His children liked her now．They had never been so friendly with any woman， since their mother had died．
　　On her last day，Mary and John had lunch in the factory restaurant together．
　　'You don't have to go， you know， Mary，'John said．'This company is very successful， and it's growing all the time．Your new paint has meant four hundred new jobs—all because of your discovery！ This isn't a poor town any more—it's becoming successful，rich！ People will want to move here from other places．'
　　He talked about the new sports centre at Andrew's school，which was built with money from the paint company．There were two big，new shops in the town as well，and a new the－atre，and a lot of new houses．'And it's all because of you，'he said．'It's wonderful， Mary，don't you think？'He smiled at her across the table，and took her hand in his．
　　She looked at him quietly．He had changed a lot since he had first started working at the factory．For the first six months after he had got the job，he had been really happy and lively．She had always known where he was in the factory，because he was always laughing，or singing to himself．
　　But for the last eighteen months he had been much quieter．He was always busy，but he didn't sing or laugh，and he didn't often look Mary in the eyes．And when he was alone，he looked tired and sad．
　　She took her hand away from his，gently．'You know why I'm going，John，'she said．'I know what's going into the river，and I don't like to think about it．You should leave，too，and get a job in another company．'
　　'I'm too old．'John stared at her angrily．'It isn't easy for me to get a new job．And Mary，the company has been mak-ing the paint for more than two years now，and no one's been hurt，have they？'
　　Mary didn't answer for a moment．Then she said，'Only you．'
　　'What do you mean，only me？'
　　She looked at him sadly．His head was bald now， and he was beginning to look like an old man．Once，she had wanted to marry him．Now，she was pleased that he hadn't asked her．
　　'Oh，I just meant your leg，of course．'John still had a painful red place on his leg，and sometimes he walked badly because of it．But that wasn't what Mary meant．
　　John smiled．'My leg's nearly better．I'd almost forgotten about it．But Mary，before you go…I wonder if you could help me．It's a family matter．'
　　'I see．Well，how can I help？I don't know your children very well，you know．'
　　'No，of course not．But you're a woman，and…well，it's sometimes difficult for me，as a father on my own．Christine's a young woman now，and she hasn't got a mother to discuss things with．I don't always know what to say．'
　　'No．'mary looked at him sadly．She often wondered why he didn't ask her to his house more often．She liked him and his children，and she thought he liked her．'How old is Chris-tine now？'
　　'Eighteem．And she wants to get married．'
　　'Already？She's rather young，isn't she？'
　　John looked unhappy．'Well，that's what I say．But she gets so angry with me，Mary，really angry．'
　　'Who's the young man？'
　　'He's called Simon MacDonald．He's a journalist—he works for the local newspaper．He's a nice young man，I sup-pose．But every time I speak to him，we argue．And then Christine always agrees with him，and I get angry with her，too．I don't want to，Mary，but I do．I feel I'm losing her，you see．'
　　'What do you argue about？'
　　'Oh，I don't know．Stupid things，really．He belongs to one of these environmental groups—Greenworld，I think—and he's always talking about it．He thinks only young people are right，and everyone over twenty-five is always wrong！'
　　Mary looked at John thoughtfully．
　　'Well，what do you want me to do，John？I'm not a moth-er and I've never been married．'
　　'No，but…you could talk to Christine，perhaps？If you came to our house for Sunday lunch…？'
　　So Mary went to John's house．Simon was there too．They had a meal and talked about horses and sailing．Everyone was polite，and there were no arguments．Later，Mary went with Christine to look at her horse，and Simon stayed with John．In the field，Mary began to talk about Simon．
　　'He's fine young man，Christine．He's very clever and kind．He makes me think of your father．'
　　'My father！He's nothing like my father！And Dad hates him！'
　　'I'm sure he doesn't．'
　　'He does！He says he's too old for me，and I mustn't see him！He thinks I'm still a little girl，Mary！But I'm eighteen！I want to get married！'
　　'Tell me more about Simon…'
　　And so for a long time Mary stood in the quiet，lonely field．She helped Christine give food to her horse，and listened to her talk about Simon．Simon，Christine said，was kind，intelli-gent，very hard-working．He liked sailing and riding，and he wanted to make the world a cleaner，better place．He made her feel important，like an adult，not a child any more．She had met his parents，and they liked her a lot．It was only her father…
　　'So what should I do，Mary？'Christineasked．
　　Mary put her hand on the horse's neck．'I'm not sure，'she said．'I think you should marry him，but you don't want to make your father angry，do you？That's not the best way to start your life with Simon．'
　　'No，but I will if I have to！'
　　'Would you liKe me to talk to him？Perhaps he'll listen to me．It's difficult for him—you're his only daughter，and he's probably very worried about it．'
　　'Oh，would you，Mary？Please．I want Dad to like Simon，really，but he's always nasty to him．'
　　'I'll do my best，my dear，but I don't know if it'll work．'
　　Mary did try，very hard，before she moved to Scotland for her new job．She spoke to John on the phone，and sometimes they had a cup of coffee together in town．She was surprised how carefully John listened to her，and how grateful he seemed write a full-page article every week on the environment．And this is the first one．Look here！'
　　He pulled a page of newspaper out of his pocket，and held it up in front of them．There were pictures of water，sandbanks，and some seals．The headline read：
　　SEALS AT RIVER MOUTH
　　HAVE STRANGE DISEASE
　　Four baby seals found dead






■ 8 The wedding day
　　The disease among the seals got worse．Three more baby seals died，and one was born without a tall．Scientists came from London to look at them，and there were long arti-cles in the newspapers，but no one was sure what the reasons were．Some people said that it was a disease that was always in the water；some people said the seals were eating diseased fish；and some people said that it was the paint factory near the river．
　　There was a sewage works near the river too．The sewage from another small town came to it．One day，in the factory，John Duncan found two young chemists testing samples of wa-ter from the river．The water came from two kilometres up-stream，near the sewage works．
　　'Why are you doing that？'he asked，surprised．
　　'It's a special experiment，'one of them answered．'David Wilson asked us to do it himself．Didn't he tell you，sir？'
　　John didn't answer．He watched them quietly for several minutes．'What are the results？'he asked．
　　'They're bad，sir，'said the young man．But he didn't look worried；he looked pleased，proud of himself．'That sewage works is putting a lot of nasty things into the river，you know．I think the newspapers will be very interested．'
　　'The newspapers？'John asked．The young man smiled．
　　'Yes，Mr Duncan，of course．Our company cares about the environment，doesn't it？That's why we're doing this．We want to help those poor seals，if we can．'
　　As John walked away，he listened for the sound of quiet laughter behind him．But he heard nothing．Perhaps the young man really believed what he said．
　　Christine and Simon were married on a fine day in June．When they came back from the church，they had a party in the gar-den at John's house．Everyone seemed very happy．John liked Simon's parents，and talked to them a lot．
　　'You're very lucky，Mr Duncan，'simon's father said．'You have a beautiful house with a lovely river at the end of the garden．'
　　'I haven't always been lucky，'John answered．'People used to say I was a very unlucky man．'He stood still，think-ing．He remembered how unhappy he had been in the little flat in the middle of the town．He had been unemployed then，with no money to buy good things for his children．But he had always been able to talk to them．Now he was a rich man，a success，and his children didn't want to talk to him．
　　He smiled at Mr and Mrs MacDonald．'Yes，'he said．'I'm a very lucky man．I have Simon for my son-in-law．I'm very pleased for my daughter．'
　　Mrs MacDonald was pleased．'We're very pleased to have Christine for our daughter-in-law，too，'she said．'And I'm sure Simon will help you with this river，Mr Duncan．I under-stand there's a disease in it，which is making the seals ill．Simon told me he's going to work very hard to find the reason for that，and clean up the river．I'm sure you're pleased about that，Mr Duncan．'
　　'Yes，of course．'John had seen Simon's article in the newspaper last night，about the diseases that came from the sewage works．David Wilson had shown it to him．John didn't want to talk about it．
　　He saw his daughter laughing with Simon，Andrew and some friends．He had never seen her look so happy．He re-membered his own wedding，and the hopes he and Rachel had had．
　　'Let me get you another drink，Mrs MacDonald，'he said．'We must drink to our children's future，and wish them luck．'
　　At the bar in the house he met Mary．She came back to the town sometimes，and twice he had visited her in Scotland．
　　'This day's been a great success，John，'she said．'You must be a happy man．'
　　He touched her arm thoughtfully．'I'd like to be，Mary，'he said．'I've tried，you know．I've done my best．But it's their world now．They must do what they can with it． '






■ 9 I don't believe you
　　'It's not true，Christine．Simon's information is wrong．'
　　'I don't believe you，Father．'
　　John and Christine stared at each other angrily．It was a miserable，frightening moment for them both．It was a night three months after the wedding，and Christine had come with some happy news．She had come to tell her father that she was going to have a baby—his first grandchild！For a while they had talked about that，but then Christine had begun to talk about Simon's new job．Simon had found some information about the waste products from the paint factory．His informa-tion was dangerous for the company．Simon had written an ar-ticle in the newspaper，saying that waste products from the paint factory could be killing the baby seals．David Wilson had written to the newspaper immediately，saying that Simon's article was completely untrue．
　　And so instead of talking happily about the baby，Christine and her father had argued all evening．John had known for a long time that they would have this argument．And next week in the town there would be a Public Enquiry，when govern-ment officials would try to discover the truth．Scientists and lawyers would speak on both sides of the argument．Everyone in the town was talking about the Enquiry—and about Simon's newspaper article．
　　'Why did David Wilson write to the paper，Father？'Chris-tine asked．'He's not a scientist，he's just a businessman．Why didn't you write to the paper？'
　　'I have written to the paper，'said John，sadly．'You'll probably read my letter tomorrow．'
　　'Oh．What did you say？'Christine asked．
　　John felt sad．He hadn't wanted to write the letter．He and David Wilson had had a big argument about it．But in the end he had agreed．He had agreed to hide many bad things before，so one more didn't make any difference．
　　'I said that our waste products don't make the river water dangerous．We've tested them very carefully for many years，and if they are diluted in water，they are not dangerous at all．There are usually only one and a half parts per million in the river water，that's all．And the seals aren't in the river．They're out at sea．I wrote that in my letter，and I'll say the same thing at the Enquiry next week．'
　　Christine was watching him carefully as he spoke．She saw how tired and sad his face was．He was looking at his hands most of the time，not at her．
　　'Father，I want to believe you．But I can't，'she said soft-ly．
　　He looked up．'Don't then！'he said angrily．'You believe Simon，if you want to！He's a journalist，after all—I'm only a biologist，and your father．Why should you believe me？'He stood up angrily，walked to the door，and opened it．'I'm sor-ry，Christine．I've had a hard day，I'm tired，and I don't want to sit here listening to my daughter telling me I'm a liar．Go home to Simon．I'm going to bed！'
　　She got up slowly．'It's important，Father，'she said slowly．'It's important for everyone．'
　　'I know it is，Christine．But the paint factory's important too．It's given a lot to you，and me，and to the people of this town．Try to remember that，and forget about the seals for a while，can't you？'
　　'There are more important things than money，Father．'
　　'Are there？You tell that to all the people who work in the company，and live in this town．What are they going to live on，when the factory's closed because of Simon's stupid arti-cles？Can they give their children photographs of baby seals to eat？'
　　Christine looked at him for a long moment before she went out of the door．'And what about children who play by the river，Father？What if they drink the river water？What then？'
　　'Nobody drinks water from that part of the river，'he said．'And I've told you—it isn't dangerous to children．'
　　Christine closed the door quietly behind her．






■ 10 Greenworld
　　Two days 1ater Christine and Simon arrived at John's house．It was very early—five o'clock in the morning —and they didn't knock at the door，or try to wake anyone up．In fact John wasn't there；Christine knew he had gone to Scotland to see Mary．He was coming back on the morning of the Enquiry．
　　Christine and Simon walked quietly down to the boathouse by the river．Without talking，they put the boat in the water，and sailed away across the river．
　　On the other side of the river they met two friends，Peter and Susan．Their friends were wearing white clothes，with Greenworld written on them．Simon and Christine also put on white clothes．Then they all got into the boat and sailed up-stream，towards the paint factory．
　　It was a windy morning，and the waves on the river were quite big．But Christine was a good sailor，and in about half an hour，they reached the factory．Two photographers stood by the river，taking photos of them．
　　'OK，Simon，where is it？'shouted Christine．
　　'Over there，look—in front of that post！'he said．Chris-tine sailed the boat towards the post．When they were near it，they could see under the water．It was the pipe that took the waste products out of the factory．
　　'OK，here！'shouted Simon．Christine turned the boat to-wards the wind，and Susan caught hold of the post．Then Si- mon and Peter climbed out of the boat into the water．
　　The water was moving fast here，and they had to hold onto the pipe and the boat．Peter then took several strong paper bags out of the boat．The bags were small but very heavy，be-cause they were filled with building cement．Peter passed the bags one at a time to Simon，and Simon went down under the water and pushed each bag into the pipe．A few minutes later the mouth of the pipe was full of bags of cement．
　　Simon came up out of the water for the last time．'It's OK！'he shouted．'We've done it！The cement is wet already，and in a few hours it'll be as hard as a rock．Nothing can come out of that pipe now！'the two men climbed back in-to the boat and smiled at the photographers．Then Simon stood up in the boat with Christine，and held up a long white sheet．On the sheet was written：
　　GREENWORLD
　　This pipe kills seals！
　　At that moment two things happened．A man ran out of the factory，shouting angrily．And the wind suddenly became stronger．It caught the sail and sent it quickly from one side of the boat to the other．The back of the sail hit Christine hard on the back of the head．She fell into the water，like a bag of potatoes．Then the wind caught the sail again and threw it back across the boat．This time the boat fell over on its side and lay with its sail under the water．
　　Simon was under the sail．The sail and the sheet were all around him，and for several seconds he could see nothing．Then he came up，into the air．He saw a foot kicking hard in the water beside him．Someone was moving under the sail．Quickly，he went down under the water again，and tried to help Peter．But Peter caught hold of Simon，and pulled him under water too．There was a quick，frightening fight，and then Simon managed to pull them both up，into the air again ．They held onto the side of the boat together，breathing deeply．
　　Simon saw Susan holding onto the back of the boat．Then he heard someone shouting．He looked behind him and saw the man from the factory．He was shouting and pointing down-stream．But Simon had water in his ears，and at first he couldn't hear the words very well．Then he understood．
　　'Look！'the man said．'The girl！She's drowning！'
　　Simon looked downstream，where the man was pointing．He saw something white，floating，far away．It was not doing anything，just floating round and round，like a bag of old clothes on the water．Christine！The river was taking her quickly downstream，towards the sea．
　　Hurriedly，Simon began to swim after her．He was a good swimmer，but the white clothes slowed him down．He swam as fast as he could，but he seemed to go slowly，so slowly．The water seemed heavy，and held him back．For the rest of his life he would dream about that long，slow swim，towards a white body that floated quickly away in front of him．
　　At last he reached Christine．She was floating with her face down，unconscious．He tried to turn her over，but it was so difficult．She was heavy，and her arms fell back in the water when he dropped them．He got her face out of the water but her head fell backwards，lifeless，and she was not breathing．He caught hold of her face then，put his mouth over hers，and blew into it．He rested，and then blew into her mouth again，and again．Nothing happened．
　　He looked around him．They were in the middle of the river，moving quickly downstream．Here，it was about twenty-five metres to the bank，but about two hundred metres downstream a second river came in from the left．The bank was further away there，and the water moved faster．Simon was tired，and afraid．It had rained last night，and there was a lot of water moving downstream to the sea．The strong wind blew little waves into his face．
　　He began to swim on his back，pulling Christine towards the trees on the bank．He swam for half a minute，then stopped，and blew four times into her mouth．Once，he thought he saw her breathe，but he couldn't be sure．Her face was very white，and he had no idea if her heart was beating．The river was taking them quickly to the sea．
　　He swam harder，kicking strongly with his legs．Nearer—only five metres to go now．But the bank was moving past very quickly．There was a tree near the bank．Its branches were low over the water．Simon kicked hard，caught the branch，and held onto it．The water tried to pull him away．He took a deep breath，and blew strongly into Christine's mouth again．And this time，he was sure，she took a breath by herself，afterwards．
　　It took him nearly five minutes to pull her on to the bank．When they got there，he put her on the ground，breathed into her mouth again，and then felt for her heart．At first he couldn't find it—his hands were too cold．Then—yes！—it was beating．
　　For another five minutes he helped her breathe，until he was sure she could do it by herself．Then he began to shiver．The wind made his wet clothes cold on his body．He wondered what to do．Then he looked down，and saw that Christine's eyes were open．
　　'Chris，'he said．'Are you all right？'
　　She said something，but very quietly and he could not hear it．He lay down，and put his arms around her，to keep her warm．He could feel her heart beating，and her body breath-ing under him．Simon began to cry．






■ 11 The Public Enquiry
　　Two days later，the Enquiry began．Scientists came from London to ask questions about the disease that was killing the seals．Before he had gone to Scotland，John had been to see David Wilson about the Enquiry．David Wilson had asked John to speak for the company．
　　'You're our chief biologist，John，'he said．'You're an im-portant man．They'll believe you．'
　　John said nothing．He didn't want to speak at the Enquiry，but he knew he had to．David Wilson smiled．Or at least，his mouth smiled．But his eyes watched John carefully，all the time，like the cold eyes of a fish．
　　'Think carefully about what you say，John．If you say the wrong thing next week，hundreds of people will lose their jobs．And the first person to lose his job will be you，John．I promise you that．'
　　The Enquiry room was crowded．There were a lot of journal-ists and photographers there，and a lot of people from the town and the factory too．John's train was late，and he caught a taxi from the station．When he came into the room，he saw Simon，sitting with the journalists．Christine was near him，with Andrew and some young people from Greenworld．John smiled at her，but she didn't smile back．She looks very white and ill，he thought．It's probably the baby．He remembered how ill his wife Rachel had been in the mornings，before Christine was born，and he smiled sadly to himself．
　　'Mr John Duncan，please！'
　　He walked to the front of the room．As he sat down，he saw David Wilson's cold，grey eyes watching him from the other side of the room．That man should be up here instead，he thought．He should tell his own lies．
　　A lawyer began to ask him questions．At first it was easy．John explained how long he had worked for the company，and how much paint the factory produced．Then the lawyer asked about the waste products．
　　'These are very dangerous chemicals，aren't they？'the lawyer said．
　　'Well yes，of course，'John answered．'Most chemicals are dangerous if people aren't careful with them．But we're very careful with them in our factory．Everyone wears special cloth-ing．We haven't had a single serious accident in three years．'
　　'I'm pleased to hear it，'said the lawyer．'But what hap-pens outside the factory？Do you really put these very danger-ous chemicals into the river？'
　　'Yes，we do，'said John．There was a noise in the room．Someone near Christine shouted something angrily，and a po-licewoman told him to be quiet．John went on．'Of course we put these chemicals in the river，but we don't put a lot in．Only two or three hundred litres every day．That's not much．And we check the river all the time—three times every day．There are usually only two parts per million，or less，in the water near the factory，and there is much less downstream．That's not dangerous．'
　　'Not dangerous，Mr Duncan？'said the lawyer slowly．'Are you sure？'
　　'Yes，I am，'John said．He looked up，at the hundreds of eyes watching him．David Wilson's eyes，Christine's eyes，Simon's．
　　'I understand'，the lawyer said slowly，'that there has been an experiment with some rats．Some mother rats were given these chemicals in their drinking water，and some of their babies were born without legs．Is that right，Mr Duncan？'
　　John looked at the lawyer for the first time．He was a small，uninteresting-looking man in grey clothes，with grey hair and a thin face．He looks like a rat himself，John thought．The man's eyes were small and bright，and for some strange reason he had a newspaper in his hand．John began to feel afraid of him．
　　'Yes，'he said．'That's right．But rats are much smaller than people，and they were given nearly five parts per million in their drinking water for ten days．That's very different．No one drinks the river water．It goes straight out to sea．'
　　He looked at the lawyer，and waited for the question about the seals．But it didn't come．Instead，the lawyer said：'So you won't be worried，Mr Duncan，if someone falls into the river by accident，and drinks a lot of river water．Your own daughter，for example．There's no danger in an accident like that—is that right？'
　　John looked at Christine across the room．How big her eyes look in that white face，he thought．It must be because of the baby．
　　'No，'he said．'There's no danger at all．'
　　There was the sound of voices in the room．The lawyer smiled a small，rat-like smile．He held his newspaper out to-wards John．
　　'You've been away in Scotland，Mr Duncan，'he said．'Have you seen this？'
　　As John read the newspaper，his hands began to shake，and he had to hold the side of the table．There was a picture of Christine，standing up in a boat near the factory，and another picture of her lying in an ambulance，with Simon beside her．The headline said：
　　BIOLOGIST'S DAUGHTER NEARLY
　　DROWNS IN RIVER
　　There was a long silence．He tried to read the newspaper carefully，but there was something wrong with his eyes．And his head was full of pictures of Christine in the river，drowning．And his wife，Rachel，drowning in the storm，long ago．
　　He shook his head quickly from side to side，then took his glasses off and cleaned them．
　　'No，'he said in a quiet voice．I haven't read this before． '
　　'It's all right，Mr Duncan，'said the lawyer softly．'Your daughter is safe．Her husband saved her，and she hasn't lost her baby．But she did drink a lot of river water．It was near the factory，too．You're not worried about that，are you？'
　　The lawyer's bright eyes were staring at him，like a rat that has just seen its food．Behind him，David Wilson suddenly stood up．
　　'That is a terrible question！'he shouted into the silence．'You can't ask a man questions like that！Of course he's wor-ried about his daughter！You must stop this Enquiry at once！'
　　'Just a minute，Mr Wilson，'said the lawyer．'Mr Duncan can go in a minute．He just has to answer one question．Are you worried，because your daughter has drunk so much river water，Mr Duncan？Are you worried about her baby？'
　　John Duncan stared at the lawyer with fear in his eyes．Sud-denly he hated him．He picked up the newspaper and threw it into the little man's rat-like face．'Yes！'he shouted wildly．'Yes！Yes！Yes！Of course I'm worried about the baby！Of course it's dangerous！Now let me go！'
　　He ran down the room，out of the door，into the street．A hundred staring eyes watched him go．






■ 12 The future
　　Six months later，John Duncan was living in a small flat near the sea．He had lost his job，and had had to sell his expensive house． He couldn't afford the payments on it．
　　From a window in his flat，he could look at the sea．He sat and looked at the cold，grey sea for hours，every day．
　　Christine would have her baby soon．He had bought lots of baby clothes to give her．His bedroom was full of baby clothes —little pink coats and trousers for a girl，blue ones for a boy．There were little soft toys too—teddy bears and small animals with blue，empty eyes．
　　But he hadn't given any of these things to her，because she wouldn't talk to him．When he went to see her，she closed the door in his face；when he rang，she put the phone down；when he wrote，she sent the letters back unopened．
　　There were a lot of books and magazines in his bedroom，too．But he kept them under his bed．He read them sometimes at night，but he didn't like to see them during the day．They were about babies，and the diseases that babies could get，be-fore they were born．There were some terrible things in the books，terrible pictures．He didn't like to think about them，but he couldn't stop．He thought about them all day， all the time．
　　Today，as he sat staring out of the window at the sea，he could not stop his hands shaking．Every morning he rang the hospital，to ask if his daughter Christine MacDonald was there．He had rung this morning，and a nurse had said yes，Christine was there，and the baby was coming．That had been four hours ago．For two hours John had sat by the telephone，afraid to ring the hospital again．Three times he had picked it up，and three times he had put it down again．
　　He picked it up again，and rang the number．Seven… five …eight… three…it was no good．He put the phone down again．He could not hear the news from the cold voice of a nurse over the telephone．He had to see the baby for himself．
　　He got up，put on his coat，and went downstairs．There was a cold wind outside，blowing from the sea．The sea and the sky were grey and miserable．He went into a shop and bought some flowers．He chose them carefully—bright red and yellow colours—and the shopkeeper put paper around them to keep them safe．John took them and walked quickly，nervously，along the windy road by the sea，towards the hos-pital．
　　It was raining out at sea．Already the rain was falling on the sandbanks where the seals used to live．Soon it would be falling on the town．John Duncan shivered，and turned his coat collar up．Then，with his bright flowers in his hand，he walked on，into the winter wind．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Hound of the Baskervilles by Arthur Conan Doyle





■ 1 The Case Begins
　　The September sun was shining brightly into the win－dows of 221B Baker Street，and London was enjoying a beautiful late summer．I had finished my breakfast and was reading the newspaper．As usual，Holmes had got up late，and was still eating．We were expecting a visitor at half past ten，and I wondered whether Holmes would finish his breakfast be－ fore our visitor arrived．
　　Holmes was in no hurry．He was reading once again a letter he had received three days ago．It was from Dr James Mortimer，who asked for an appointment with Holmes．
　　'Well，Watson，'Holmes said to me，'I'm afraid that a doc－ tor from Devonshire won't bring us anything of real interest．His letter doesn't tell us anything about his business though he says it's very important．I hope we can help him．'
　　At exactly half past ten there was a knock on our front door．
　　'Good，'said Holmes．'Dr Mortimer is clearly a man who will not waste our time．'
　　We stood up as our visitor was brought into the room．
　　'Good morning，gentlemen，'he said．'I'm Dr James Mor－ timer，from Grimpen in Devonshire，and I think you must be Mr Sherlock Holmes．'He shook hands with Holmes，who said：
　　'How do you do，Dr Mortimer？May I introduce my good friend，Dr John Watson，who helps me with my cases．I hope you will allow him to listen to our conversation．'
　　'Of course，'said Mortimer，as he turned to me and shook hands．'I need your help very badly，Mr Holmes．If it will be useful for Dr Watson to hear what I have to say，please let him stay and listen．'
　　Mortimer did not look like a country doctor．He was very tall and thin．He had a long thin nose．His grey eyes were bright，and he wore gold glasses．His coat and trousers were old and worn．His face was young，but his shoulders were bent like an old man's and his head was pushed forward．He took some pa－ pers from his pocket，and said：
　　'Mr Holmes，I need your help and advice．Something very strange and frightening has been happening．'
　　'Sit down，Dr Mortimer，'said Holmes，'and tell us your problem．I'll help you if I can．'






■ 2 The Baskerville Papers
　　'These papers were given to me by Sir Charles Baskerville，'said Dr Mortimer．'He asked me to take good care of them．You may remember that Sir Charles died suddenly three months ago．His death caused much excite－ ment in Devonshire，the county where Baskerville Hall is．Sir Charles was a sensible man，but he believed the story which is told in these papers．'
　　Dr Mortimer went on：'The story is about the Baskerville family．I have come to see you because I need your help．I think that something terrible is going to happen in the next twenty－ four hours．But you can't help me unless you know the story in these papers．May I read them to you？'
　　'Please continue，Dr Mortimer，'said Holmes，and sat back in his chair with his eyes shut．
　　Mortimer began to read in his high，rather strange，voice：
　　I，William Baskerville，write this for my sons in the year 1742．My father told me about the Hound of the Baskervilles．He told me when it was first seen，and I be- lieve his story was true．I want you，my sons，to read this story carefully．I want you to know that God punishes those who do evil．But never forget that He will forgive those who are sorry for any evil they have done．
　　Over a hundred years ago，in 1640，the head of the Baskerville family was Sir Hugo Baskerville．He was a wild and evil man．He was cruel and enjoyed hurting peo－ ple．Sir Hugo fell in love with the daughter of a farmer who was a neighbour of his．The young woman was afraid of the evil Hugo，and avoided him．One day，Hugo heard that her father and brothers were away．He knew that she would be alone．So he rode to the farm with five or six of his evil friends．They made the girl go back to Baskerville Hall with them，and locked her in a room upstairs．Then they sat down in the great dining hall to drink．As usual，they drank bottle after bottle and soon they began to sing and laugh and shout evil words．
　　The girl upstairs，who was already very frightened，felt desperate when she heard the terrible things they were shouting．So she did a very brave thing．She opened the window，climbed out of the room and down the ivy on the wall．Then she started to run across the moor towards her home．
　　A little while later，Hugo left his friends and went up- stairs to the room to take her some food and drink．When he found an open window and an empty room，he behaved like a man who was mad．He ran down the stairs．He screamed that he would give himself to the Devil if he caught the girl before she reached home．Some of Hugo's drunken friends told him to let the hounds chase her，and so he ran from the house and unlocked the dogs．Then he jumped onto his black horse，and rode off over the moor with the hounds running and crying around him．
　　Hugo's friends fetched their horses and followed him．There were thirteen of them．After a mile or two they passed an old farmer and asked him if he had seen Sir Hugo and the hounds．The man looked half mad with fear and spoke with difficulty．He said that he had seen the girl and the hounds running close behind her．Sir Hugo had been riding just behind the hounds．'But I have seen more than that，'the old man said．'Behind Sir Hugo I saw a huge and terrible hound running silently．May God keep me safe from that hound of hell．'
　　The thirteen men laughed at the old man and rode on．But their laughter soon stopped when they saw Sir Hugo's horse running wildly towards them without a rider．
　　The thirteen men moved closer together as they rode on．They were suddenly afraid．Over the moor they went until，at last，they caught up with the hounds．
　　Everyone in the county knew that the Baskerville hounds were brave and strong．But now they were stand- ing at the head of a deep valley in the moor with their ears and tails down．They were very frightened．Hugo's friends stopped．Most of them would not go on，but three were brave enough to go down into the valley．
　　The valley had a wide flat floor．In the middle of the flat ground stood two great stones．They had stood there for thousands of years．The moon was shining brightly on the great stones，and between them，on the flat ground，lay the girl．She had fallen there，dead of fear and exhaus- tion．Sir Hugo's body was lying near her．But it was not the sight of Sir Hugo or the girl that filled the men with fear．It was the sight of the huge animal that was standing over Sir Hugo．Its teeth were at his throat．It was a great black creature that looked like a hound．But it was larger than any hound they had ever seen．
　　As they watched，it tore out Hugo Baskerville's throat．Then it turned towards them．Its eyes were burning brightly．Its body shone with a strange light．Blood ran from its mouth．The men screamed and kicked their horses．They rode back up the valley as fast as they could go．Later that night one died from the horror he had seen．The other two were mad for the rest of their lives．
　　That was the first time the Hound appeared，my sons．It has been seen many times since then，and many of the Baskervilles have died in strange and terrible ways．Be- cause of this I warn you not to cross the moors at night．The Devil finds it easy to do his work when the world is dark．






■ 3 How Sir Charles Died
　　When Dr Mortimer had finished reading this strange story，he looked across at Sherlock Holmes．Holmes looked bored．
　　'Did you find the story interesting？'asked Dr Mortimer．
　　'It may interest a collector of stories to frighten children，' said Holmes．
　　Dr Mortimer took a newspaper from another pocket．
　　'Now，Mr Holmes，let me read you something which was written only three months ago．It is from the Devonshire County Newspaper，and it is about the death of Sir Charles Baskerville．'
　　Holmes looked more interested．Dr Mortimer began to read：
　　The sudden death of Sir Charles Baskerville has caused great sadness in the county．Although he had lived at Baskerville Hall for only two years，everyone liked him．Sir Charles had lived abroad and made his money there．He came back to spend his fortune on repairing Baskerville Hall and its farms and villages，as the buildings and lands were in very poor condition．He was a friendly and generous man，who gave freely to the poor．
　　The official report of his death does not explain every－ thing that happened．However，it does show that there was no question of murder．Sir Charles died from natural causes，and the strange stories people are telling about his death are not true．His friend and doctor，Dr James Mor－ timer，said that Sir Charles'heart had been weak for some time．
　　The facts are simple．Every night before going to bed，Sir Charles went for a walk in the gardens of Baskerville Hall．His favourite walk was down a path between two hedges of yew trees，the famous Yew Alley of Baskerville Hall．On the night of 4th June he went out for his walk to think and to smoke his usual cigar．
　　Sir Charles was going to London on the next day，and Barrymore，his butler，was packing his suitcases．By mid- night Barrymore was worried that Sir Charles had not re－ turned，so he went to look for him．He found the door of the Hall open．The day had been rainy and wet so Barry－ more saw the prints left by Sir Charles'shoes as he had walked down the Alley．Half way down the Alley is a gate，which leads to the moor．There were signs that Sir Charles had stood there for some time．Barrymore fol－ lowed the footprints to the far end of the Alley．And there he found Sir Charles'body．
　　Barrymore reported something interesting about the footprints．He said that they changed between the moor gate and the end of the Alley．As far as the moor gate there was a whole footprint for each of Sir Charles'steps．After he passed the gate，only toe prints could be seen．Barrymore thought that Sir Charles had walked on his toes．
　　A man called Murphy，who buys and sells horses，was not far away at the time of Sir Charles'death．He had been drinking a lot of beer，but he says he heard cries．He is not sure where they came from．
　　Dr Mortimer was called to look at Sir Charles'body．There were no signs that Sir Charles had been murdered，but Dr Mortimer did not recognize his friend's face．The whole shape of it was changed．However，this often hap－ pens with deaths which are caused by weak hearts．When Dr Mortimer looked at the body，he found that this was，in fact，what had happened．Sir Charles'weak heart had failed，and this had caused his death．
　　Everyone hopes that the new head of the Baskerville family will move quickly into the Hall．Sir Charles good work must go on．
　　The new head of the Baskerville family will be Sir Hen- ry Baskerville，if he is still alive and if the lawyers can find him．He is the son of Sir Charles Baskerville's younger brother，who died some years ago．The young man has been living in the USA．The Baskerville lawyers are trying to contact him to tell him about his good fortune．
　　Dr Mortimer put the newspaper back into his pocket．
　　'Those are the official facts about the death of Sir Charles．They are the facts that everyone knows，Mr Holmes，'he said．
　　'Thank you for informing me about this interesting case，'Holmes said．'I read about it at the time，but I heard none of the details．The newspaper gives the facts that everybody knows．Now I want you to tell me all the other facts that you know．What do you know about the strange stories？'
　　'I haven't told anyone these other facts，'said Dr Mortimer．'I am a man of science，as you know．I have always believed that there are sensible explanations for everything．I didn't want to say anything that could stop Sir Henry from coming to live at the Hall．But I will tell you tile details that were not in the report．'
　　'In the months before his death，'Dr Mortimer went on，'Sir Charles was a very worried man．He was near to breaking down．He believed the story of the Hound of the Baskervilles．He refused to go out at night．He often asked me whether I had seen any strange animal or heard the cry of a hound on the moor at night．He always got very excited when he asked this question．
　　'I remember driving up to the Hall one evening about three weeks before he died．He was standing at the door．I went up to him，and saw him staring at something behind me．There was a look of horror on his face．I turned quickly and saw something moving between the trees．It looked like a small black cow．He was so frightened that I went to look for the animal．It had disappeared but Sir Charles was very worried．I stayed with him all the evening．It was then he gave me the old papers I have read to you．What I saw that evening may be im- portant when you consider what happened on the night of his death．
　　'When Barrymore，the butler，found Sir Charles'body，he sent someone to fetch me．I checked all the facts．I have just read them to you，and they are all true．
　　'But Barrymore said one thing that was not true．He said that there were no other prints on the ground around the body．He did not notice any．But I did．They were not close to the body，but they were fresh and clear．'
　　'Footprints？'asked Holmes．
　　'Yes．Footprints，'said Mortimer．
　　'A man's or a woman's？'asked Holmes．
　　Dr Mortimer looked at us strangely for a moment．His voice became a whisper as he answered：
　　'Mr Holmes，they were the footprints of a huge hound！'






■ 4 The Problem
　　Ifelt a moment of fear as Mortimer spoke these words．Holmes sat forward in his excitement，and his eyes showed he was very interested indeed．
　　'Why did nobody else see these footprints？'he asked．
　　'The footprints were about twenty metres from the body，and nobody thought of looking so far away，'Mortimer replied．
　　'Are there many sheep dogs on the moor？'asked Holmes．
　　'Yes，but this was no sheep dog．The footprints were very large indeed—enormous，'Mortimer answered．
　　'But it had not gone near the body？'
　　'No．'
　　'What kind of night was it？'Holmes asked．
　　'It was wet and cold，though it wasn't actually raining．'
　　'Describe the Alley to me．'
　　'The Alley is a path between two long yew hedges．The hedges are small trees that were planted very close together．They are about four metres high．The distance between the two yew hedges is about seven metres．Down the middle is a path of small stones．The path is about three metres wide，with grass on each side of it．'
　　'I understand there is a gate through the hedge in one place，'said Holmes．
　　'Yes，there is a small gate，which leads to the moor．'
　　'Is there any other opening through the hedge？'
　　'No．'
　　'So you can enter or leave the Yew Alley only from the Hall，or through the moor gate？'asked Holmes．
　　'There is a way out through a summer house at the far end．'
　　'Had Sir Charles reached the summer house？'
　　'No．He lay about fifty metres from it，'said Mortimer．
　　'Now，Dr Mortimer，this is important．You say that the footprints you saw were on the path and not on the grass？'
　　'No footprints could show on the grass，'said Mortimer．
　　'Were they on the same side of the path as the moor gate？'
　　'Yes．They were．'
　　'I find that very interesting indeed．Another question：was the moor gate closed？'
　　'Yes．It was closed and locked．'
　　'How high is it？'asked Holmes．
　　'It is just over a metre high．'
　　'Then anyone could climb over it？'
　　'Yes．'
　　'What prints did you see by the moor gate？'
　　'Sir Charles seems to have stood there for five or ten min－ utes，'said Mortimer．'I know that because his cigar had burned down and the ash had dropped twice off the end of it．'
　　'Excellent，'said Holmes．'This man is a very good detective，Watson．'
　　'Sir Charles had left his footprints all over that little bit of the path where he was standing．I couldn't see any other prints．'
　　Sherlock Holmes hit his knee with his hand angrily．
　　'I like to look closely at these things myself，'he said．'Oh，Dr Mortimer，why didn't you call me immediately？'
　　'Mr Holmes，the best detective in the world can't help with some things，'said Mortimer．
　　'You mean things that are outside the laws of nature—su- pernatural things？'asked Holmes．
　　'I didn't say so exactly，'replied Mortimer．'But since Sir Charles died，I have heard about a number of things that seem to be supernatural．Several people have seen an animal on the moor that looks like an enormous hound．They all agree that it was a huge creature，which shone with a strange light like a ghost．I have questioned these people carefully．They are all sensible people．They all tell the same story．Although they have only seen the creature far away，it is exactly like the hell- hound of the Baskerville story．The people are very frightened，and only the bravest man will cross the moor at night．'
　　'And you，a man of science，believe that the creature is supernatural—something from another world？'asked Holmes．
　　'I don't know what to believe，'said Dr Mortimer．
　　'But you must agree that the footprints were made by a liv- ing creature，not a ghost？'
　　'When the hound first appeared two hundred and fifty years ago，it was real enough to tear out Sir Hugo's throat…but it was a supernatural hell-hound，'said Dr Mortimer．
　　'If you think that Sir Charles' death was caused by some－ thing supernatural，my detective work can't help you，'said Holmes，rather coldly．
　　'Perhaps，'said Mortimer．'But you can help me by advis- ing me what to do for Sir Henry Baskerville．He arrives in Lon－ don by train in exactly，'Dr Mortimer looked at his watch，'one hour and a quarter．'
　　'Sir Henry is now head of the Baskerville family？'asked Holmes．
　　'Yes，'said Dr Mortimer．'He is the last of the Baskervilles．The family lawyers contacted him in the USA．He has come to England immediately by ship．He landed this morning．Now，Mr Holmes，what do you advise me to do with him？'
　　'Why should he not go to the family home？'asked Holmes．
　　'Because so many Baskervilles who go there die horrible deaths．But Sir Charles'good work must go on．If it doesn't，all the people on the Baskerville lands will be much poorer．If the Baskerville family leaves the Hall，that is what will happen．I don't know what to do．That is why I came to you for advice．'
　　Holmes though for a little while．Then he said：'You think it is too dangerous for any Baskerville to live at the Hall because of this supernatural hell－hound．Well，I think you should go and meet Sir Henry Baskerville．Say nothing to him about this．I shall give you my advice in twenty－four hours．At ten o'clock tomorrow morning，Dr Mortimer，I would like you to bring Sir Henry Baskerville here．'
　　Dr Mortimer got up from his chair．As he was leaving the room，Holmes said：'One more question，Dr Mortimer．You said that before Sir Charles'death several people saw this strange creature on the moor？'
　　'Three people did，'said Mortimer．
　　'Did anyone see it after the death？'
　　'I haven't heard of anyone．'
　　'Thank you，Dr Mortimer．Good morning．'
　　After Mortimer had left us，Holmes sat down in his chair．He looked pleased．He always looked pleased when a case interest－ ed him．
　　I knew that he needed to be alone to think about all that he had heard．I went out for the day，and came back to find the room full of thick smoke from Holmes'pipe．
　　'What do you think of this case？'I asked him．
　　'It is hard to say．Take，for example，the change in the foot－ prints．Did Sir Charles walk on his toes down the Alley？Only a stupid person is likely to believe that．The truth is he was run－ ning—running for his life．He ran until his heart stopped and he fell dead．'
　　'What was he running from？'I asked．
　　'That is the difficult question，'said Holmes．'I think he was mad with fear before he began to run．He didn't know what he was doing．That explains why he ran away from the house instead of towards it．He was running away from help．The next question：who was he waiting for that night？And why was he waiting in the Yew Alley and not in the house？'
　　'You think he was waiting for someone？'
　　'Sir Charles was old and unwell．We can understand why he took a walk each evening．But why did he stand in the cold，on wet ground，for five or ten minutes？Dr Mortimer cleverly noted the cigar ash，so we know how long Sir Charles stood there．We know that he kept away from the moor，so it's un－ likely that he waited at the moor gate every evening．I am be－ ginning to understand some things，Watson．But I'll think no more about it until we meet Dr Mortimer and Sir Henry Baskerville in the morning．Please give me my violin．'
　　And Holmes began to play his violin．He had done all the thinking he could．Now he needed more details of the case to help him．






■ 5 Sir Henry Baskerville
　　Dr Mortimer and Sir Henry Baskerville arrived at exact-ly ten o'clock the following morning．Sir Henry was a small，healthy，well－built man．His face showed that he had a strong character．He wore a country suit of thick，red－brown material，and his skin showed that he spent most of his time in the open air．
　　'I am glad this meeting was already arranged，'Sir Henry said，after we had shaken hands with our visitors．'I need your help，Mr Holmes．A strange thing happened to me this morning．Look at this letter．'
　　He put a piece of paper on the table．On it were the words： 'Do not go on to the moor．If you do，your life will be in dan-ger．'The words had been cut out of a newspaper．
　　'Can you tell me，Mr Holmes，what this means，and who is so interested in me？'Sir Henry asked．
　　'This is very interesting，'said Holmes．'Look how badly it has been done．I think the writer was in a hurry．Why？Per－haps because he did not want somebody to see him．I think the address was written in a hotel．The pen and the ink have both given the writer trouble．The pen has run dry three times in writing a short address．There was probably very little ink in the bottle．A private pen and bottle of ink are never allowed to get into that condition．Hullo，what's this？'He was holding the letter only a few centimetres from his eyes．
　　'Well？'I ashed．
　　'Nothing，'he said，and threw the letter down．'Now，Sir Henry，have you anything else to tell us？'
　　'No，'said Sir Henry．'Except that I have lost one of my shoes．I put a pair outside my door last night．I wanted the ho- tel to clean them，but when I went to get them this morning，one had gone．I only bought them yesterday，and I have never worn them．But I wanted a good shine on them．'
　　'One shoe seems a useless thing to steal，'said Holmes．'I am sure the shoe will be found in the hotel and returned to you．But now we must tell you some things about the Baskerville family．'
　　Dr Mortimer took out the old Baskerville papers and read them to Sir Henry．Holmes then told him about the death of Sir Charles．
　　'So this letter is from someone who is trying to warn me，or frighten me away，'said Sir Henry．
　　'Yes，'said Holmes．'And we have to decide if it is sensible for you to go to Baskerville Hall．There seems to be danger there for you．'
　　'There is no man or devil who will stop me from going to the home of my family，'said Sir Henry angrily．'I want some time to think about what you have told me．Will you and Dr Watson join me for lunch at my hotel in two hours'time？By then，I'll be able to tell you what I think．'
　　Dr Mortimer and Sir Henry said goodbye，and decided to walk back to their hotel．
　　As soon as our visitors had gone，Holmes changed from the talker to the man of action．
　　'Quick，Watson．Your coat and hat．We must follow them．'We got ready quickly and went into the street．Our friends were not far ahead of us and we followed．We stayed about a hundred metres behind them．
　　Suddenly Holmes gave a cry．I saw a taxi driving along very slowly on the other side of the road from our friends．
　　'That's our man，Watson！Come along！We'll have a good look at him．'
　　I saw a man with a large black beard looking out of the taxi window．He had been following and watching our friends．But when he saw us running towards him，he shouted something to the driver，and the taxi drove off quickly down the road．Holmes looked round for another taxi，but could not see one．He began to run after the first taxi，but it was soon out of sight．
　　'Well，I got the number of the taxi，'said Holmes．'So I can find the driver．He may be able to tell us something about his passenger．Would you recognize the man if you saw him again？'
　　'Only his beard，'I said．
　　'He wanted us to recognize the beard，'said Holmes．'I think it was a false one．'






■ 6 More Mystery
　　Later，we went on to Sir Henry's hotel．He was pleased to see us，but rather angry because another of his shoes had disappeared．This time it was one shose of an old pair．I could see that holmes found this both interesting and strange．He thought about it for a few moments，but said nothing ex- cept that he did not understand why a second shoe had been stolen．
　　At lunch，Sir henry told Holmes that he had decided to go to Baskerville Hall．
　　'I think you have decided to do the right thing，'said Holmes．'I know somebody is following you．If someone tries to harm you in London，it will be hard to stop him or catch him afterwards．In the country we have a better chance．'
　　Holmes went on to tell them about what we had seen that morning．Then he asked Dr Mortimer if anyone with a large black beard lived in or near Baskerville Hall．
　　'Yes，said Dr Mortimer，'Barrymore，Sir Charles'butler，has a black heard．'
　　'We must check whether Barrymore is in London or at Baskerville Hall，'said Holmes．'I shall send a telegram to Bar－ rymore at the Hall，which will say：“Is everything ready for Sir Henry？”Then I'll send another telegram to the local post of－ fice．This one will say：“please put telegram to Mr Barrymore into his own hand．If he is away，please return telegram to Sir Henry Baskerville．”I'll give your address at this hotel．We shall know before evening whether Barrymore is in Devonshire or not．'
　　'Barrymore and his wife have a very fine home and nothing to do while the family is not living in the Hall，'said Sir Henry．
　　'That's true，'said Holmes．'Did the Barrymores receive anything from Sir Chades'will？And did they know that they would get some money when he died？'
　　'Yes，'said Dr Mortimer．'They each received￡500，and Sir Charles told everyone what he had written in his will．'
　　'That's very interesting，'said Holmes．
　　'I hope you don't suspect everyone who got something from the will，'said Dr Mortimer．'I received￡1000．'
　　'Indeed！'said Holmes．'And who else received money？'
　　'A lot of people received a little money．He gave a lot of money to a number of hospitals．The rest all went to Sir Henry，who received￡740000．'
　　'I had no idea it was so much，'said Holmes in surprise．
　　'The Baskerville lands are worth about one million pounds，' Dr Mortimer said．
　　'Dear me，'said Holmes．'A man could kill for that much．One more question．If something happened to our young friend here，who would get Baskerville Hall and all its lands？'
　　'Well，as you know，Sir Charles had two brothers．Sir Henry is the only son of Sir Charles'younger brother．The youngest brother of the three，Roger，was a criminal．The police wanted him，so he had to leave England．They say he looked exactly like the family picture of old Sir Hugo，who first saw the Hound．He was the same kind of man，too．He went to South America，where he died of a fever．So if Sir Henry died，Baskerville Hall would go to James Desmond，who is a cousin of the Baskervilles．James Desmond is an old man，who lives in the north of England．His life is very simple and he would not want to be rich．'
　　'Thank you，Dr Mortimer，'said Holmes．'Now，Sir Henry，I agree that you should go to Baskerville Hall as quickly as pos－ sible．But you must not go alone．I myself cannot leave London at the present time．I am working on another case．I am trying to save one of the most important men in England from a diffi－ cult situation．I hope my friend Watson will go with you．If there is danger，you could not have a better man by your side．'
　　Sir Henry and I were both very happy with this idea．So we arranged to travel to Devonshire on the following Saturday．
　　Just as we were leaving Sir Henry's room，he gave a cry and got down on his knees by the table．
　　'Here's my brown shoe that was lost，'he said，reaching un－ der the table．
　　'That's very strange，'said Dr Mortimer．'We both
　　searched the room before lunch，and it wasn't under the table then．'
　　None of the people who worked at the hotel could explain how the shoe had got back into the room．
　　So we had another mystery．On the way back to Baker Street in the taxi，Holmes sat thinking deeply．All through the afternoon and the evening he went on thinking silently，and smoking pipe after pipe．
　　Just before dinner，a telegram arrived．It was from Sir Henry and said：'Have just heard that Barrymore is at the Hall．'
　　'So we don't have the answer to the mystery of the man with the beard，'said Holmes．'But perhaps we shall soon have an answer to another question．'
　　At that moment the door bell rang．It was the driver of the bearded man's taxi．
　　'I got a message that you wanted to see me，'said the driver．'I hope there's nothing wrong．'
　　'No，no，my good man，'said Holmes．'In fact I'll give you some money if you can answer my questions clearly．Tell me all about the man in your taxi this morning．He was watching this house at ten o'clock and then told you to follow the two gentlemen who came out of it．'
　　The taxi driver was surprised at how much Holmes seemed to know．He answered：'The man told me that he was a detec－ tive，and that I should say nothing about him to anyone．'
　　'This is a serious business，'said Holmes，'and you will be in trouble if you try to hide anything．What can you tell me？'
　　'The man told me his name，'said the driver．Holmes looked like a man who has just won an important game．'That was not very clever of him，'he said．'What was his name？'
　　'His name，'said the taxi driver，'was Sherlock Holmes．'
　　I have never seen my friend look more surprised Then he laughed loudly．'Tell me where be got into your taxi and everything that happened．'
　　We already knew most of what the taxi driver told us．But we learned that after we had lost sight of the taxi，it had gone to Waterloo Station，where the man had caught his train．The taxi driver said that the man was well-dressed and had a black beard and pale face．He was about forty and not very tall．The driver did not know the colour of the man's eyes．
　　Holmes gave the man a pound，and sent him away．Then he said：
　　'We have a very clever enemy，Watson．He is winning the game at the moment．We have no answers at all to the strange things that have happened in London．I hope you are more suc- cessful at Baskerville Hall，but I am not happy about sending you there．There is too much danger in this case．'






■ 7 Baskerville Hall
　　Holmes came to Waterloo Station to say goodbye to us．Our friends told him that they were sure nobody had followed them since our last meeting．Sir Henry's other shoe had not reappeared．Holmes repeated his warning that Sir Hen－ ry should not go on the moor at night，and should not go any- where alone．Then Holmes checked with me that I had my gun，an army revolver．
　　The journey was fast and enjoyable．We were met at New－ town Station and driven to Baskerville Hall．The countryside we drove through was beautiful，but behind it we could see the long，dark，frightening hills of the moor．
　　As we turned a corner，we were surprised to see a soldier on horseback．He was carrying a gun．
　　Dr Mortimer asked our driver why the soldier was there．
　　'A dangerous criminal has escaped from the prison，sir，'he told us．'He's been free for three days now，and people are frightened．His name is Selden．He's the man who did that murder in London．'
　　I remembered the case well．It had been a very cruel murder．I thought of this killer out on the empty，wild moor，and I felt more and more uncomfortable about my surroundings．The beautiful green fields with their thick hedges were behind us，and we were now on the cold，open moor．Everything was grey，hard and wild Huge rough stones stood on the hard ground．The tops of the hills stood sharply like cruel teeth against the sky．A cold wind was blowing，and night was falling．I saw Sir Henry pull his coat closer round him．
　　At last we reached the gates of Baskerville Hall．From the gates a long，dark road led up to the house，with the black shapes of old trees on each side of it．At the end of this road we could see the great house standing with a pale light round it like a ghost．
　　'I can understand why my uncle felt that trouble was com－ ing to him here．It's not a welcoming place，'said Sir Henry，and his voice shook as he spoke．
　　As we got closer，we could see that the Hall was a heavy，dark building with a large main entrance．Most of the building was old and was covered in dark green ivy，but some of it had been built more recently and was of grim，black stone．A dull light shone through the heavy windows．Black smoke was com－ ing from one of the high chimneys of the main building．
　　'Welcome，Sir Henry！Welcome to Baskerville Hall．'
　　Barrymore，the butler，and his wife were waiting on the steps at the main entrance They came down and took our suit－ cases into the house Dr Mortimer left us to go home，and we went into the hall，where a fire was burning．It was a fine room，large and high．
　　'It's exactly as I imagined an old family home，'Sir Henry said．
　　Barrymore showed us to our rooms He was a tall，handsome man，with a full black beard．After we had washed and changed our clothes，he brought us to dinner．The dining-room was not very welcoming．It needed more lights to make it brighter．On the walls were the pictures of the Baskervilles of the past．They looked down on us silently，and did nothing to make us feel happier．
　　After dinner we went to our rooms．Before I got into bed，I looked out of my window A strong wind sang sadly as it bent the trees in front of the Hall．A half moon shone through the dark，flying clouds onto the wild and empty moor．
　　I could not sleep．Then，suddenly，in the middle of the night I heard very clearly the sound of a woman crying．It was the crying of a person who was hurt by some deep sadness．The sound was not far away，and was certainly in the house．






■ 8 The Stapletons of Pen House
　　The next morning was sunny，and we were much more cheerful．
　　I told Sir Henry about the crying I had heard．He rang the bell to call Barrymore，and asked him if he could explain the crying．Barrymore's face went white when he heard Sir Henry's question．
　　'There are only two women in the house，Sir Henry，'he an- swered．'One is the maid，who sleeps on the other side of the house．The other is my wife，and she was certainly not crying．'
　　But he was telling a lie．I saw Mrs Barrymore after breakfast．The sun was full on her face，and it was clear she had been crying．
　　Why had Barrymore lied？What deep sadness had made his wife cry？There was a mystery surrounding this black- bearded，handsome man．Was it possible that Barrymore was in fact the man who had been watching Sir Henry in London？I decided I must check with the local post office that the tele－ gram had really been put into Barrymore's own hands．
　　While Sir Henry worked at some papers，I walked to the post office．It was in the nearest village，which was called Grimpen．I spoke to the boy who had taken the telegram to the Hall．
　　'Did you give it to Mr Barrymore himself？'I asked．
　　'Well，'the boy said，'he was working upon the roof，so I couldn't give it to him．I gave it to Mrs Barrymore，and she promised to give it to him at once．'
　　'Did you see Mr Barrymore？'I asked him．
　　'No，'said the boy，'but why did his wife say he was upon the roof if he wasn't？'
　　It was hopeless to ask any more questions．It was clear that Holmes' cleverness with the telegram had not given us the proof we needed．
　　I was walking away from the post office when I heard some- one running after me．A voice called me by name，and I turned．I expected to see Dr Mortimer，as I knew nobody else in the village．To my surprise it was a stranger．He was a small，thin man，between thirty and forty years old，with fair hair and no beard．He was carrying a butterfly net，and a box for putting butterflies in．
　　'I hope you will excuse me for introducing myself，Dr Wat－ son，'he said as he came up to me．'My name is Stapleton．I was in Dr Mortimer's house and we saw you．He told me who you are．May I walk along with you？ This path back to the Hall goes near my home，Pen House．Please come in and meet my sister，and spend an hour with us．'
　　I accepted Stapleton's invitation，and we walked together．
　　'I know that you are a close friend of Sherlock Holmes，'said Stapleton．'Has Mr Holmes any ideas about Sir Charles death？'
　　'I'm afraid I can't answer that question，'I said．
　　'Will Mr Holmes visit us himself？'he asked．
　　'He can't leave London at the moment，'I answered．I was rather surprised that he was asking me these questions
　　We walked on．Stapleton told me that he and his sister had lived in Devonshire for only two years．They had moved there soon after Sir Charles had begun to live in Baskerville Hall．He also talked about the moor and how it interested him．He told me to look across the moor to a place which was a bright green colour．
　　'That is the Great Grimpen Marsh，'he said 'If animals or men go into the marsh，they will sink into it and die．But I can find my way to the very centre of it．Look，there is another of those poor horses．'
　　Something brown was fighting to get out of the bright green of the marsh．Then a terrible cry came across the moor．The horse's head and neck disappeared under the green．
　　'It's gone，'Stapleton said．'The marsh has caught and killed it．That often happens．It is an evil place，the Great Grimpen Marsh．'
　　'But you say you can go safely in and out of it？'I asked him．
　　'Yes，there are a few paths，and I have found them．The low hills you can see are like islands surrounded by the marsh．That is where I can find the unusual plants and butterflies．And that's why I found my way through the marsh．'
　　'I shall try my luck one day，'I said．
　　He looked at me in surprise．'Please don't try，'he said．'You would never return alive，and it would be my fault．'
　　'Listen，'I said．'What is that？'
　　A long，low cry，very deep and very sad，came over the moor．It filled the whole air．Then it died away．
　　'What is it？'I asked，with a cold fear in my heart．
　　Stapleton had a strange look on his face．'The people say it's the Hound of the Baskervilles，which is calling for some－ thing to hunt and kill．I've heard it once or twice before，but never so loud．'
　　'You are a man of science，'I said．'You don't believe that，do you？Isn't there a natural explanation for the sound？'
　　'A marsh makes strange noises sometimes．It is the water and the wet ground moving．'
　　'But that was the voice of a living creature，'I said．
　　'Well，perhaps it was．There are some very unusual birds on the moors．It was most probably the cry of one of those．'
　　At that moment a small butterfly flew across the path in front of us．'Excuse me，Dr Watson，'shouted Stapleton，and ran off to try to catch the butterfly．He ran quickly and fol－ lowed the butterfly on to the marsh，but he knew exactly where he could go，and was not in any danger．
　　As I watched him，I heard the sound of steps behind me．I turned and saw a woman near me on the path．I was sure she was Miss Stapleton．She was very beautiful．She was dark and tall，with a lovely face．Before I could say anything，she said：
　　'Go back！Go straight back to London，immediately．I can－ not tell you why，but please do what I ask you，and never come near the moor again．But my brother is coming．Not a word to him．'
　　Stapleton had caught the butterfly，and was walking bath to us．
　　'Hello，my dear，'he said to his sister，but it seemed to me that his voice was not completely friendly．'I see that you two have already introduced yourselves．'
　　'Yes，'she said．'I was telling Sir Henry that it was rather late in the year for him to see the true beauty of the moor．'
　　'I am sorry，'I said．'You have made a mistake．I'm not Sir Henry．I am a friend who is visiting him，and my name is Dr Watson．'
　　Miss Stapleton was clearly angry with herself．'I'm sorry，' she said．'Please forget what I said．But do come with us to our house．'
　　The house was lonely and rather grim．I wondered why the two of them had come to live so far away from anyone else．Stapleton seemed to know what I was thinking，and said：'You may think this a lonely，strange place to live，but the moors are very interesting，and we enjoy it here．I owned a school in the north of England，but I had to close it．I miss the boys and girls but thefe is plenty to do here，and we have good neighbours．I hope Sir Henry will become one of tnem．May I visit the Hall this afternoon to meet him，do you think？'
　　'I'm sure he will be very pleased to meet you，'I said．'I must go back to the Hall now，and I shall tell him immediately．'
　　I said goodbye to the Stapletons，and continued on the path back to the Hall．I had been walking for only a few minutes when I was surprised to see Miss Stapleton sitting on a rock ahead of me．She was breathing quickly，and I realized she had run by a quicker way to get ahead of me．
　　'Dr Watson，'she said．'I want to say sorry for the mistake I made．I thought you were Sir Henry．Please forget what I said．I did not mean you were in danger．Now I must go，or my brother will miss me．'
　　'I cannot forget your words，Miss Stapleton，'I said．'If Sir Henry is in danger，I must tell him．'
　　'You know the story of the Hound？'she asked me．
　　'Yes，but I do not believe it，'I replied．
　　'But I think it's true，'she said．'Please persuade Sir Henry to leave this place．So many of his family have died here mys- teriously．He must not put his life in danger by staying here．'
　　'Sir Henry won't leave this place without a real reason，'I said．
　　'I can't give you a real reason．I don't know anything for certain．'
　　'One more question，Miss Stapleton，'I said．'The story of the Hound is well known．Why didn't you want your brother to hear what you said？'
　　'My brother wants the head of the Baskerville family to live in the Hall，'she said．'He wants Sir Henry to continue the good work that Sir Charles began．He doesn't want Sir Henry to go and live in another place．So he doesn't want me to talk about the Hound．I must go now，or my brother will guess I have been speaking to you．Goodbye！'
　　She turned and went back towards her house，and I walked on to Baskerville Hall．






■ 9 The Escaped Prisoner
　　Mr Stapleton came to the Hall and met Sir Henry that same afternoon．The next morning he took us to the place where the evil Sir Hugo died．Then we had lunch at the House．Sir Henry clearly thought Miss Stapleton was very beautiful．His eyes followed her everywhere．He liked her very much，and I was sure that she felt the same about him．He spoke about her again and again as we walked home．After the first meeting，we met the Stapletons almost every day．
　　After a short time it was clear that Sir Henry had fallen deeply in love with the beautiful Miss Stapleton．At first I thought that Stapleton would be very pleased if his sister mar－ ried Sir Henry．However，I soon realized that he did not want their friendship to grow into love．He did everything he could to make sure that they were never alone．On one or two occa－ sions they did manage to meet alone，but Stapleton followed them and was not pleased to see them together．
　　I soon met another neighbour of Sir Henry's．His name was Mr Frankland，and he lived about four miles to the south of the Hall．He was an old man with a red face and white hair．He had two hobbies．The first was arguing．He argued with everybody．The second hobby was studying the stars．For this he had a very big telescope．For several days he had been watching the moor through the telescope．He wanted to find Selden，the escaped murderer．Nobody had seen the prisoner for a fortnight，and we all thought that he had probably left the moor．
　　A few nights later I was woken by a noise at about two in the morning．I heard someone walking softly outside my door．I got up，opened the door and looked out．I saw Barrymore moving carefully and quietly away from me．I followed him，as quietly as I could．He went into one of the empty bedrooms and left the door open．I went quietly up to the door and looked in－ side．
　　Barrymore was standing at the window．He was holding a light in his hand and looking out onto the moor．He stood without moving for a few minutes and then he put out the light．
　　I went quickly back to my room．A few minutes later I heard Barrymore go softly by．
　　The next morning I told Sir Henry what I had seen．
　　'We must follow him and find out what he is doing，'said Sir Henry．'He won't hear us if we move carefully．'
　　That night we sat in Sir Henry's room and waited．At about three o'clock in the morning we heard the sound of footsteps outside the bedroom．We looked out and saw Barrymore．We followed him as quietly as we could．He went into the same room as before．We reached the door and looked in．There was Barrymore，with the light in his hand，looking out across the moor，exactly as I had seen him on the night before．
　　Sir Henry walked into the room and said：'What are you do- ing here，Barrymore？'
　　Barrymore turned round quickly，surprise and horror on his face．
　　'Nothing，Sir，'he said．The shadows on the wall from his light were jumping up and down as his hand shook．'It was the window，sir．I go round at night to see that they are closed，and this one wasn't shut．'
　　'Come now，Barrymore，'said Sir Henry．'No lies．What were you doing with that light？You were holding it up to the window．'
　　I suddenly had an idea．'I think he was sending a message，' I said．'Let's see if there's an answer from someone on the moor．'
　　I held the light up to the window，and looked out into the darkness．Suddenly a light answered from the moor．
　　'There it is，'I cried．I waved my light backwards and for－ wards across the window．The light on the moor answered by moving in the same way．
　　'Now，Barrymore，who is your friend on the moor？What's going on？'
　　'That's my business，'said Barrymore，'I won't tell you．'
　　'Are you making some criminal plan against me？'Sir Henry said．
　　'No，it's nothing against you，sir，'said a voice behind us．It was Mrs Barrymore．She had followed us and was standing at the door．'He's doing it for me．My unhappy brother is cold and hungry on the moor．We cannot let him die．Our light is to tell him that food is ready for him．His light shows us where to take it．'
　　'Then your brother is…'began Sir Henry．
　　'The escaped prisoner，sir．Selden，the murderer．He is my younger brother．He has done evil things，but to me he is still the little boy I loved and cared for．I had to help him．Every－ thing my husband has done has been for me．Please don't take his job from him．It's not his fault．'
　　Sir Henry turned to Barrymore and said：
　　'I cannot blame you for helping your wife．Go to bed，and we'll talk about this in the morning．'
　　The Barrymores left us．
　　'The murderer is waiting out there by that light，' said Sir Henry．'He's a danger to everyone．I'm going to catch him．If you want to come with me，Watson，fetch your revolver and let's go．'
　　We left the Hall immediately．
　　'We must surprise him and catch him．'said Sir Henry．'He's a dangerous man．Now，Watson，what would Holmes say about this？Do you remember what the old papers said？ They said the Devil does his work when the world is dark．'
　　Just as he spoke there came a strange cry from across the moor．It was the same cry I had heard when I was with Staple－ ton on the edge of the Great Grimpen Marsh．
　　'What is that noise？'asked Sir Henry．He stopped and put his hand on my arm to hold me back．
　　'I've heard it before，'I said．'Stapleton says it's the cry of a bird．'
　　'Watson，'said Sir Henry，his voice shaking，'it is the cry of a hound．What do the local people say it is？'
　　'They say it is the cry of the Hound of the Baskervilles，'I replied．
　　'Can there possibly be some truth in the story？'said Sir Henry．'Am I really in danger from such an evil thing？I think I am as brave as most men，but that sound froze my blood．But we have come out to catch that prisoner，and the Devil himself will not make me turn back．'
　　It was difficult to cross the moor in the dark，but at last we reached the light．It was standing on a rock．Suddenly an evil face，more like an animal than a man，looked at us from behind the rock．The escaped prisoner saw us and screamed as he turned to run．
　　Sir Henry and I were both good runners and very healthy men，but we soon realized that we had no chance of catching Selden．He knew the way，and was running for his life．Soon we had lost him in the dark，so we stopped and sat down，breathing heavily，to rest．
　　At that moment a very strange thing happened．The moon was low upon our right，and in its light we could see the top of a hill．On that hill，with the moon behind him，stood a tall，thin man．He was standing perfectly still．He was watching us．
　　It was not Selden，who had been running away from that hill．This man was much taller．With a cry of surprise I turned to Sir Henry．As I turned，the man disappeared．
　　I wanted to go across to the hill and search for him，but we were tired and I remembered that Sir Henry might be in dan－ ger．So we went back to Baskerville Hall．
　　Who was the tall man I had seen standing against the moon？ Was he an enemy，or a friend who was watching over us？
　　I wished more and more that Holmes could leave London and come to Baskerville Hall．I wrote to him every few days and gave him the details of everything that happened and everyone I met．






■ 10 The Letter
　　The following day was dull and foggy．The Hall was sur－ rounded by heavy，low clouds，which opened now and then to show the grim，cold moor and its wet，grey rocks．The weather made us miserable．It was difficult to be cheerful when we felt danger all around us．I thougth of Sir Charles'death，and the awful sound of the hound，which I had now heard twice．Holmes did not believe that there was a supernatural hound．But facts are facts，and I had heard a hound．Was there a huge hound living on the moor？If so，where could it hide？Where did it get its food？Why was it never seen by day？ It was almost as difficult to accept a natural explanation as a su－ pernatural explanation．
　　That morning Sir Henry and Barrymore argued about Selden，the escaped prisoner．Barrymore said that it was wrong to try to catch Selden．
　　'But the man is dangerous，'said Sir Henry．'He'll do any- thing．Nobody is safe until he is in prison again．We must tell the police．'
　　'I promise he won't break into any house，'said Barrymore，'and he won't cause any trouble．In a few days he will catch a boat for South America．Please don't tell the police about him．If you tell the police，my wife and I will be in serious trouble．'
　　'What do you say，Watson？' asked Sir Henry，turning to me．
　　'I don't think he will break into houses，or cause trouble．If he did，the police would know where to look for him and would catch him．He's not a stupid man．'
　　'I hope you're right，'said Sir Henry．'I'm sure we're breaking the law．But I don't want to get Barrymore and his wife into trouble，so I shall not tell the police．I shall leave Selden in peace．'
　　Barrymore could not find the words to thank Sir Henry enough．Then he said：'You have been so kind to us that I want to do something for you in return．I have never told any- one else．I know something more about poor Sir Charles'death．'
　　Sir Henry and I jumped up at once．
　　'Do you know how he died？'Sir Henry asked．
　　'No，sir，I don't know that，but I know why he was waiting at the gate He was going to meet a woman．'
　　'Sir Charles was meeting a woman？Who was the woman？'
　　'I don't know her name，'Barrymore said，'but it begins with L．L．'
　　'How do you know this，Barrymore？'I asked．
　　'Well，Sir Charles got a letter on the morning of the day he died．It was from Newtown，and the address was in a woman's writing．I forgot all about it，but some time after Sir Charles died my wife was cleaning the fireplace in his study．She found a letter．Most of it was burned，but the bottom of one page was not burned．On it was written：“Please，please，burn this letter，and be at the gate by ten o'clock．L．L．”The paper fell into pieces as my wife went to move it．We don't know who L．L．is，but if you could find out，you might learn more about Sir Charles'death．We haven't told anyone else．We felt it would not be good for poor，kind Sir Charles．But we thought we ought to tell you，Sir Henry．'
　　The Barrymores left us and Sir Henry turned to me．'If we can find L．L．，the mystery may be at an end，'he said．'What do you think we should do，Watson？'
　　'I must write to Holmes at once，'I said，and I went straight to my room and wrote a letter to Holmes，which gave him all the details of Barrymore's story．
　　On the following day heavy rain fell without stopping．I put on my coat and went for a long walk on the moor．I thought of Selden out on the cold moor in this weather．And I thought of the other man，the mysterious watcher．
　　As I walked，Dr Mortimer drove past me．He stopped and said he would take me back to the Hall．
　　'I expect you know almost everybody living near here，'I said．'Do you know a woman whose names begin with the let－ ters L．L．？'
　　Dr Mortimer thought for a minute，and then he said：'Yes，Mrs Laura Lyons．She lives in Newtown．'
　　'Who is she？'I asked．
　　'She's Mr Frankland's daughter．'
　　'What，old Frankland who has the large telescope？'
　　'Yes，'said Dr Mortimer．'Laura married a painter called Lyons who came to paint pictures of the moor．But he was cruel to her，and after a while he left her．Her father will not speak to her，because she married against his wishes．So her husband and her father have made her life very unhappy．'
　　'How does she live？'I asked．
　　'Several people who knew her sad story have helped her．Stapleton and Sir Charles gave her some money．I gave a little myself．She used the money to start a typewriting business．'
　　Dr Mortimer wanted to know why I was asking about Mrs Lyons．However，I preferred to keep the reason secret，and we talked about other things for the rest of the journey．
　　Only one other thing of interest happened that day．In the evening after dinner I had a few words with Barrymore alone．I asked him whether Selden had left the country．
　　'I don't know，sir，'Barrymore replied．'I hope he has gone．But I've not heard anything of him since I last left food and some clothes for him，and that was three days ago．'
　　'Did you see him then？'
　　'No，sir，but the food and clothes were gone when I next went that way，'Barrymore told me．
　　'Then Selden was certainly there？'I asked．
　　'I think so，sir，unless the other man took everything．'
　　I sat very still and looked hard at Barrymore．'You know there is another man，then？Have you seen him？'
　　'No，sir，but Selden told me about him a week or more ago．He is hiding from someone，too，but he is not an escaped prisoner．I don't like it，sir．Something evil is going to happen，I'm sure．Sir Henry would be much safer in London．'
　　'Did Selden tell you anything more about the other man？'I asked．
　　'He looked like a gentleman．He was living in one of the old stone huts on the moor．A boy works for him and brings him all the food and things he needs．That's all Selden told me．'
　　I thanked him，and he left me．I went to the window and looked out at the rain and the clouds.It was a wild night．I knew the huts Barrymore had spoken about．There were many of them on the moor．They had been built many hundreds of years ago by the people who lived on the moor．They would not keep a man warm and dry in bad weather．Selden could not choose to live anywhere else，but why did the other man live in such conditions？
　　I sat and thought what I should do next．I decided I must try to find the man who had been watching us．Was he the en- emy who had been following us since the very beginning in London？ If he was，and I could catch him，perhaps our diffi- culties would be at an end．
　　I also decided to hunt the man on my own．Sir Henry was still shaken by the terrible cry we had heard on the moor．I did not want to add to his troubles or to lead him into more danger．






■ 11 Laura Lyons
　　Ιtold Sir Henry about Laura Lyons，and that I wanted to speak to her as soon as possible．Then I went to her house in Newtown．
　　A maid took me into the sitting room，where a very pretty lady with dark hair was working at a typewriter．I told her who I was，and that I had met her father．
　　'I have no contact with my father，'she said．' He gave me no help when I was in trouble．Sir Charles Baskerville and some other kind people helped me when I was poor and hungry．'
　　'It is about Sir Charles that I have come to see you，'I said．'I want to know if you ever wrote to him and asked him to meet you．'
　　She looked very，angry，and her face went white．
　　'What a question！'she said．'What right have you to ask me about my private life？But the answer is “no”．'
　　'Surely you are not remembering clearly，'I said．'I think you wrote to him on the day that he died．And your letter said： “Please，please，burn this letter，and be at the gate by ten o'clock．”'
　　For a moment I thought she was going to faint．Then she said in a low oice：'I asked Sir Charles to tell nobdy．'
　　'You must not think that Sir Charles spoke to anyone about you，'I said．' He put the letter on the fire，but not all of it was burnt．Now，did you write that letter to him？'
　　'Yes，'she said．'Why should I be ashamed of writing to him？I wanted him to help me．I learned that he was going to London early on the following day，so I asked him to meet me before he went．I could not go to the Hall earlier that day．'
　　'But why did you ask him to meet you in the garden instead of in the house？'I asked．
　　'Do you think it would be sensible for a woman to go at that time of night into the house of an unmarried man？'she asked．
　　'Well，what happened when you got there？'I asked．
　　'I didn't go，'she replied．
　　'Mrs Lyons！'
　　'I tell you I did not go．Something happened that stopped me from going．I can't tell you what it was．'
　　'Mrs Lyons，' I said．' If you did not see Sir Charles，you must tell me why．If you do not，it will look very bad for you if I have to go to the police with this new piece of information about the letter．'
　　Mrs Lyons thought for a moment，and then she said：' I see that I must tell you．Perhaps you know that I married a man who was very cruel to me．I hate him and I wanted to get a di-vorce．But a divorce is expensive，and I had no money．I thought that if Sir Charles heard my sad story，he would help me to get a divorce．'
　　'Then why didn't you go to see Sir Charles？'I asked her．
　　'Because I got help from someone else，'she said．
　　'Why didn't you write to Sir Charles and tell him？'
　　' I was going to，but I saw in the newspaper the next morn- ing that he had died．'
　　I asked Mrs Lyons a number of other questions，but she did not change her story，whatever I asked her．I was sure that she was telling the truth．I could check two important parts of the story．If they were right，there could be no doubt that she was telling the truth．I could check that she had begun to get her divorce at about the time of Sir Charles' death．I could also check that she had not been to Baskerville Hall on the night of Sir Charles' death．
　　But I was not sure that she had told me the whole truth．Why had she nearly fainted when I had told her about the let- ter？ That was not completely explained by the story she had told me．
　　I had discovered all I could for the moment．I left her，and went to search for more information in a different place．






■ 12 The Man on the Moor
　　I drove out of Newtown and went to begin my search for the mysterious man on the moor．There were hundreds of the old stone huts on the moor．Barrymore did not know in which of them the mysterious man was living.I had seen the man on the night when Sir Henry and I had chased Selden，so I decided to start my search near that place．
　　The path I took ran past Mr Frankland's house，and I saw him standing at his gate He called to me，and invited me to go in and have a drink with him．He had been arguing with the police，and was angry with them．He began to tell me about it．
　　'But they will be sorry，'he said．'I could tell them where to look for the escaped prisoner，but I am not going to help them．You see，I have been searching the moors with my telescope，and although I have not actually seen the prisoner，I have seen the person who is taking him food．'
　　I thought of Barrymore and Mrs Barrymore's worried faces．But Mr Frankland's next words showed me that I did not need to worry．
　　'You will be surprised to hear that a young boy takes food to the prisoner．The boy goes by at about the same time each day，and he is always carrying a bag．Who else can he be going to see—except the prisoner？Come and look through my tele- scope，and you will see that I am right．It is about this time each day that the boy goes by．'
　　We went up onto the roof，and we did not have to wait long．There was someone moving on a hill in front of the house．I looked through the telescope and saw a small boy with a bag over his shoulder.He looked around to make sure that noboay was following him，and then he disappeared over the hill．
　　'Remember that I don't want the police to know my secret，Dr Watson，'Frankland reminded me．'I'm too angry with them at the moment to help them．'
　　I agreed not to tell the police，and said goodbye.I walked along the road while Frankland was watching me，but as soon as I was round the corner，I went towards the hill where we had seen the boy．
　　The sun was already going down when I reached the top of the hill.I could not see the boy，and there was nothing else in that lonely place Beneath me on the other side of the hill was a circle of old stone huts．In the middle of the circle was one hut that had a better roof than the others，so it would keep out the wind and the rain．This must be the place where the mysteri- ous man was hiding！I would soon know his secret．
　　As I walked towards the hut，I saw that someone had cer-tainly been using it．A path had been worn up to the door．I took my revolver out of my pocket，and checked that it was ready to fire．I walked quickly and quietly up to the hut，and looked inside．The place was empty．
　　But this was certainly where the man lived.As I looked round the hut，I knew that the mysterious man must have a very strong character．No other person could live in conditions as bad as these．There were some blankets on a flat stone where the man slept．There had been a fire in one corner．There were some cooking pots，and a large bowl half full of wa- ter．In the middle of the hut was another large flat stone which was used as a table，and on it was the bag the boy had been carrying．Under the bag I saw a piece of paper with writing on it．Quickly，I picked up the paper and read what was written on it．It said：'Dr Watson has gone to Newtown．'
　　I realized that the mysterious man had told someone to watch me，and this was a message from his spy．Was the man a dangerous enemy？ Or was he a friend who was watching us to make sure we were safe？I decided I would not leave the hut until I knew．
　　Outside，the sun was low in the sky．Everything looked calm and peaceful in the golden evening light．But I did not feel peaceful or calm．I felt frightened as I waited for the mysterious man．
　　Then I heard footsteps coming towards the hut．As they came closer，I moved into the darkest corner of the hut．I did not want the man to see me until I had looked closely at him．The footsteps stopped，and I could hear nothing at all．Then the man began to move again，and the footsteps came closer．A shadow fell across the door of the hut．
　　'It's a lovely evening，my dear Watson，'said a voice I knew well．'I really think you will enjoy it more out here．'






■ 13 Too Late
　　For a moment or two I could neither breathe nor move．
　　Then I felt my fear and unhappiness disappear，as I knew that I was no longer alone in my responsibility for Sir Henry．The dangers all around me did not seem so frightening．The cool voice could belong to only one man in the world．'Holmes！'I cried．'Holmes！'
　　I went outside the hut，and there was Holmes．He was sit- ting on a stone，and his grey eyes were dancing with amuse- ment．He was thin and worn，but bright and wide-awake．His skin was brown from the wind and the sun．But his chin was smooth，and his shirt was white．He did not look like a man who had been living in the middle of the moor．
　　'I have never been so glad to see anyone in my life，'I said，'nor so surprised．'
　　'I am surprised，too，'Holmes said，as he shook me warmly by the hand．'How did you find me？'
　　I told him about Frankland，and how I had seen the boy with the food．
　　Holmes went into the hut，and looked at the food，and at the note with it．' I guess that you have been to see Mrs Laura Lyons，' he said，and when I told him that he was right，he went on：' When we put together everything that each of us has discovered，I expect we shall know almost everything about this case．'
　　'But how did you get here？'I asked him．'And what have you been doing？ I thought you had to finish your case in Lon- don．'
　　'That is what I wanted you to think，'he said．
　　'Then you have tricked me，and have no confidence in me，' I said．I was upset and angry because he had not told me his plans．
　　'I am sorry if it seems I have tricked you，my dear Watson．I did not want our enemy to know I was here，but I wanted to be near enough to make sure that you and Sir Henry were safe．You are a kind person—too kind to leave me alone out here in bad weather．Our enemy would guess I was here if he saw you coming out with food，or with important news．You have been a very real help to me．Your letters with all their valuable information have been brought to me．You have done excellent work，and without you I would not have all the im- portant details I needed．'
　　Holmes' warm words of thanks made me feel much happier，and I saw that he was right．
　　'That's better，'he said，as he saw the shadow lift from my face．'Now tell me about your visit to Mrs Laura Lyons．'
　　I told Holmes everything Mrs Lyons had said．
　　This is all very important，'Holmes said．'It answers ques- tions I have been unable to answer、Did you know that Mrs Lyons and Stapleton are very close friends？ They often meet，and they write to each other．Perhaps I can use this informa- tion to turn Stapleton's wife against him…'
　　'His wife？'I asked．'Who and where is she？'
　　'The lady called Miss Stapleton，who pretends to be his sis-ter，is really his wife，'said Holmes．
　　'Good heavens，Holmes！Are you sure？If she is his wife，why did Stapleton allow Sir Henry to fall in love with her？' 'Sir Henry hurt nobody except himself when he fell in love with her．Stapleton took care that Sir Henry did not make love to her．I repeat that the lady is his wife，and not his sister．They came here only two years ago，and before that he had owned a school in the north of England．He told you that，and you told me in your letter．I checked on the school，and found that the man who had owned it went away with his wife when the school closed．They changed their name，but the couple who were described to me were without doubt the Stapletons．''But why do they pretend to be brother and sister？' I asked．'Because Stapleton thought that she would be very much more useful to him if she appeared to be a free woman．'
　　Suddenly I saw behind Stapleton's smiling face a heart with murder in it．'So he is our enemy！He is the man who followed us in London！ And the warning note to Sir Henry came form Miss Stapleton．'
　　'Exactly，'said Holmes．
　　'But if Miss Stapleton is really his wife，why is he a close friend of Mrs Laura Lyons？'
　　'Your excellent work has given us the answer to that ques－ tion，Watson When you told me that Mrs Lyons was getting a divorce，I realized that she hoped to marry Stapleton．He told her that he was unmarried，and that he wanted to make her his wife．When she learns the truth，she may decide to help us．We must go and see her tomorrow．'
　　'One last question，Holmes，'I said.'What is Stapleton try- ing to do？'
　　Holmes dropped his voice as he answered：'Murder，cold- blooded murder．That is what Stapleton is trying to do．Do not ask me for details．I am about to catch him in a trap．There is only one danger——that he will act before I am ready．Another day，or perhaps two，and I shall complete my case．Until then you must guard Sir Henry very closely．You should be with him today．However，what you have discovered is very valuable．'
　　As he finished speaking，an awful scream——a long cry of pain and horror——broke the silence of the moor．The sound turned my blood to ice．
　　'Oh，my God，'I whispered．'What is that？'
　　Holmes had jumped to his feet．'Where is it，Watson？' he whispered，and I could see that he was shaken by the scream．
　　The hopeless cry came again，louder，nearer，and more terrible than before．With it came a new sound——deep and frightening．'The hound！'cried Holmes．'Come，Watson，come！Great heavens！If we are too late…'






■ 14 Death on the Moor
　　Holmes started running over the moor，and I followed him．From somewhere in front of us came one more hopeless scream．It was followed by the sound of something falling heavily．We stopped and listened．
　　I saw Holmes put his hand to his head.' He has won，Wat-son．We' re too late.I was mad not to act sooner．And you，Watson，look what happens when you leave the man I asked you to guard．But if the worst has happened，we shall see that Stapleton doesn't go free．'
　　We ran through the dark towards the place where the cries had come from．We reached a rocky edge from which a steep side fell away.Below us we saw the body of a man．He was ly-ing with his face down on the ground．He had fallen on his head，which was bent under him，and his neck was broken．Holmes lit a match．We saw with horror the blood running out onto the ground from his head．
　　We both remembered clearly the suit the man was wearing．It was a thick，red-brown country suit．It was the suit Sir Hen-ry had been wearing on the morning when we first met him in Baker Street．We saw it for a moment and then the match went out.Our hearts turned sick and cold inside us．
　　'The devil！The murderer！I shall never forgive myself for leaving Sir Henry alone，'I whispered angrily．
　　'It's more my fault than yours，'said Holmes．'I have let this good man die because I was busy with the last details of my case．It is the greatest mistake I have ever made．But why did he come out onto the moor？I told him it would lead to his death．Now both Sir Henry and his uncle have been murdered．By heavens，clever as he is，I shall trap Stapleton before another day is past．'
　　With heavy hearts we stood on either side of the broken body．Then Holmes bent over the body and began to move it．All of a sudden he began to laugh and jump up and down．
　　'Look at the face！'he shouted，hitting me on the back．'It is not Sir Henry．It's Selden，the escaped prisoner．'
　　We turned the body over．There was no doubt about it．I had seen the face before，on the night Sir Henry and I had chased Selden over the moor．Then I suddenly remembered，and everything became clear．Sir Henry had told me how he gave his old clothes to Barrymore．I realized that this suit had been among the clothes Barrymore had left for Selden，and I told Holmes．
　　'Then the clothes have caused the death of the poor man．The hound had been given something of Sir Henry's to smell so that it would pick up his scent and follow him．I think that is why the shoe was taken from the hotel in London．So the hound followed the scent and bunted this man．But there is one thing I don't understand．How did Selden know that the hound was following him？ We know he ran a long way．He was screaming for a long time before he fell，and we could hear that he was running as he screamed．So the hound was a long way behind him when he began to run．How could he see it in the dark？ How did he know it was there，until it was close be- hind him？'
　　'I cannot answer that，'I said，' but there is something else I don' t understand．Why was the hound out on the moor tonight？Stapleton would not let it go out unless he thought Sir Henry was there．'
　　'We may know the answer to that question very soon，'said Holmes．'Here comes Stapleton．'
　　His sharp eyes had seen a figure moving in the darkness in front of us，and the man came closer，I could see that it was indeed Stapleton．
　　'We must be very careful not to show that we suspect him，'Holmes warned me．
　　Stapleton stopped when he saw us，and then walked forward again．'Dr Watson，is that you？I didn't expect to see you on the moor at this time of night But，dear me，what's this？ Somebody hurt？ Not—don't tell me that it's our friend Sir Henry！'
　　He went past me and bent over the dead man．I heard him breathe in quickly．
　　'Who…who is this？' he asked，his voice shaking．
　　'It's Selden，the escaped prisoner．'
　　Stapleton quickly managed to hide the look of surprise and disappointment on his face as he turned towards us．He looked sharply from Holmes to me．'Dear me！ How terrible！ How did he die？'
　　'We think he broke his neck by falling over the edge of these rocks，'I said．
　　'I heard a cry，and that is why I came out．I was worried about Sir Henry，'Stapleton said．
　　'Why were you worried about Sir Henry？'I asked．
　　'Because I had invited him to my house．When he did not come I was surprised．Then，when I heard cries on the moor，I began to worry about him．I wonder'—his eyes went quickly from my face to Holmes'—' did you hear anything else at all？'
　　'No，'said Holmes．'Did you？'
　　'No，'said Stapleton．
　　'What do you mean，then？'
　　'Oh，you know the stories about the supernatural hound．I wondered if it had been here tonight．'
　　'We heard nothing of that kind，'I said．
　　'How do you think this poor man fell to his death？'Staple- ton asked．
　　'I think cold and hunger，and his fear that the police would catch him，drove him mad．He ran round the moor in his mad- ness，and fell over this edge，'I said．
　　'Do you agree，Mr Sherlock Holmes？'asked Stapleton．
　　'You're quick to guess who I am，'said Holmes．
　　'We're been expecting you ever since Dr Watson arrived．'
　　'I have no doubt my friend is right about the way Selden died，'said Holmes．'It' s a sad death，but it will not prevent me from returning to London tomorrow．'
　　'Before you return，will you be able to explain the mysteries that we've experienced here？'
　　'I am not always as successful as I hope．I need facts，not stories of the supernatural．This hasn' t been a good case for me．
　　Stapleton looked hard at him，but Holmes had spoken very seriously and his words sounded true．
　　We covered the body．Then Stapleton turned to go home，and Holmes and I walked towards Baskerville Hall．
　　'He's a very clever man，and a dangerous enemy，who will be difficult to trap，' said Holmes．' Look how he controlled his disappointment when he found that the dead man was not Sir Henry．'
　　'I'm sorry that he has seen you，'I said．
　　'So am I，but there was nothing we could do about it．Now he knows I am here he may be more careful，or he may act more quickly than he planned．'
　　'Why can't we give him to the police at once？'
　　'Because we can't prove anything against him．Sir Charles was found dead because his heart failed．Again，tonight we could not prove that there was a hound．Selden died from a fall．We have no case at present．We shall see Mrs Lyons to- morrow，and she may help us．But whatever happens，I have my own plan．There will be some danger，but by the end of to-morrow I hope to have won this battle．'
　　He would say nothing else．
　　'Are you coming to the Hall？'I asked．
　　'Yes，'he replied．'There is no reason for me to hide any longer．But one last word，Watson Say nothing of the hound to Sir Henry．Let him think that Selden died from a fall．If he knows about the hound，he will find it harder to face the dan- gers of tomorrow．I think you told me in your last letter that he is having dinner with the Stapletons tomorrow evening．'
　　'And they have invited me，too，'I reminded him．
　　'Then you must excuse yourself，and he must go alone．That can easily be arranged And now I think we are both ready for some food．'






■ 15 The Trap
　　When we reached the Hall，Sir Henry was very pleased to see Holmes．But he was surprised that Holmes had no luggage and that he appeared so unexpectedly．
　　I had the unhappy job of telling Barrymore and his wife about her brother's death．Mrs Barrymore cried and was very sad indeed．
　　During dinner Sir Henry told us that he had spent a dull day and evening on his own．He had kept his promise to Holmes，and so he had not accepted the Stapletons' invitation to their house that evening．We did not tell him how glad we were that he had stayed away from the moor！
　　Holmes started to say something，and then he stopped sud-denly．His eyes were fixed on one of the pictures of the past Baskervilles on the wall．
　　'Sir Henry，could you tell me which Baskerville that is？'he asked．Sir Henry and I both looked at the picture．
　　'That is Sir Hugo，the one who started all the trouble，'said Sir Henry．'He was the first to see the Hound．
　　Holmes looked hard at the picture，but said nothing more．Then after Sir Henry had gone to his room，Holmes made me stand in front of the picture．' Is it like anyone you know？'he asked．He stood on a chair，and with his hands he covered the hat and hair of the man in the picture．'Good heavens！' I cried in surprise．I was looking at a pic-ture of Stapleton' s face．
　　'Yes，'said Holmes before I could say anything more．'There's not much doubt about it．Stapleton is a Baskerville．He looks like Sir Hugo，and he has the same evil character．Now I understand why he wants to kill Sir Henry．I am sure we shall find that he will inherit the Baskerville lands．And so we have one more answer．By tomorrow night Stapleton will be canght like one of his butterflies，and we shall add him to the Baker Street collection．'
　　We soon went to bed．I was up early in the morning，but Holmes was up earlier．He had already sent one message to the police about Selden，and another to his boy to stop him taking food to the hut．
　　When Sir Henry joined us，Holmes told him that we had to leave for London immediately after breakfast．Sir Henry was very unhappy about this，but Holmes asked him to help us by doing everything Holmes ordered him to do．Sir Henry agreed to help in this way，and to go by himself to the Stapletons that evening．He also agreed to tell the Stapletons that Holmes and I had gone to London，but that we would return to Devonshire soon．
　　'One more order，'said Holmes．'I want you to drive to the Stapletons'house and then send the driver away．Let the Sta-pletons know that you' re going to walk home across the moor．'
　　Across the moor？' said Sir Henry，very surprised．' But you have told me again and again not to do that．'
　　'This time it will be completely safe．I know that you are brave enough to do it，and it must be done．'
　　'Then I will do it．'
　　'But you must keep to the path between the Stapletons'house and the Grimpen road，which is your natural way home．Do not leave the path．'
　　I was very surprised by all this．Holmes had told Stapleton that he would return to London，but he had not said that I was going too．And I was very worried that neither of us would be with Sir Henry when he walked across the moor that night．But we had to obey Holmes' orders．
　　Holmes and I left Baskerville Hall immediately after break- fast and went to the station at Newtown．A small boy was waiting on the platform．
　　'Any orders，sir？'he asked Holmes．
　　'You will take the train to London，my boy．When you get there，you will send a telegram to Sir Henry in my name．It will ask him to send to me at Baker Street the pocket book I left at the Hall．'
　　I began to understand some of Holmes' plan．When Sir Hen- ry received the telegram sent by Holmes' boy，he would think that we had arrived in London．He would tell Stapleton，who would then also believe that we were far away from Baskerville Hall．In fact，we would be very close in case Sir Henry needed us．
　　We left the station and went to see Mrs Laura Lyons．I in- troduced Holmes to her．After they had shaken hands，he said：'Dr Watson has told me everything，Mrs Lyons．We see Sir Charles'death as a case of murder．Both Stapleton and his wife are suspects．
　　Mrs Lyons jumped from her chair．'His wife！'she cried．' He has no wife．He is not a married man．'
　　'I have come here ready to prove that he is married，and the woman calls herself his sister is really his wife，'said Holmes．He took some photographs and papers from his pocket，and showed them to Mrs Lyons．She looked at the photographs and read the papers．When she put them down，I could see that she had accepted the truth．
　　'I thought this man loved me，' she said，'but he has lied to me．Ask me what you like，Mr Holmes，and I will tell you the truth．I never thought any harm would come to Sir Charles．He was a dear old gentleman who was very kind to me．I would do nothing to hurt him．'
　　'I believe you，Mrs Lyons，'said Holmes．'Now，let me tell you what I think happened．You can tell me If I'm right or if I'm wrong．First of all，I think Stapleton told you to write the letter to Sir Charles and to ask him for help．He also told you to ask Sir Charles to meet you at the moor gate．Then，after you had sent the letter，Stapleton persuaded you not to meet Sir Charles after all．''Stapleton told me that he could not allow any other man to give me the money for my divorce，'Mrs Lyons said．'He said he was poor，but he would give all his money to bring us to- gether．Then，after I heard about Sir Charles' death，Stapleton told me to say nothing about my letter and the meeting．He said I would be a suspect．He frightened me into staying silent．'
　　'Yes，'said Holmes．'But you wondered about him？'
　　She said nothing for a moment，and looked down．' Yes，'she said．' But since he has lied to me about marrying me，I will no longer keep his secrets．'
　　'You are lucky that you have escaped him，'Holmes said．'You know too much But I hope you are safe now．Good morning，Mrs Lyons，and thank you．You will hear from us soon．'
　　'So one by one our questions are answered，'said Holmes as we left Newtown．'When it is over，this will be one of the most famous cases of our time．And now it has nearly ended．We must hope that it ends safely and successfully．'






■ 16 The Hound of the Baskervilles
　　That evening Holmes and I drove across the moor until we could see the lights of the Stapletons' house in front of us．Then we got out and began to walk very quietly along the path towards the house．When we were very close，Holmes told me to stop．He took his revolver from his pocket，and I did the same．
　　'We shall hide behind these rocks，' he whispered．' Watson，you know the house，so I want you to go forward and look through the windows．I want to know where the Staple－ tons and Sir Henry are，and what they are doing．Take great care，because they must not know that somebody is watching them．'
　　Very carefully and quietly I moved towards the house．I looked first into the dining-room window．Statleton and Sir Henry were sitting and smoking their cigars，but there was no sign of Miss Stapleton．I moved round to the other windows，but I could not see her in any of the rooms．
　　I went back to the dining-room window，and as I looked in again，Stapleton left the room and came out of the house．He went to a hut beside the house，and unlocked the door．I heard a strange sound coming from the hut，but I could not think what was making the noise．Then Stapleton locked the door，and went back into the house and into the dining-room．
　　I went back to Holmes and told him what I had seen．He wanted to know where Miss Stapleton was，and I had to tell him twice that there was no sign of her in the house．
　　The moon was shining on the Great Grimpen Marsh，and a fog was rising from it Holmes watched the fog and began to look worried The fog was creeping up from the marsh towards the house．We were hidden near the path，which was on the far side of the house from the marsh．
　　'The fog is moving towards us，Watson，and that is very serious，'said Holmes．'It is the one thing that could make my plans go wrong．'
　　As we watched，the fog，which had crept as far as the house，began to flow round it．Angrily Holmes hit the rock in front of us with his open hand．
　　'If Sir Henry doesn't come out in the next quarter of an hour，the path will be covered by the fog．In half an hour we shall not be able to see our hands in front of our faces．We must move back to higher ground above the fog．'
　　We moved away from the house and out of the fog，which was creeping slowly along the ground and hiding the path from our view．
　　'We must not go too far，'said Holmes．'If we do，Sir Henry may be caught before he reaches us．'
　　Holmes went down on one knee，and put his ear to the ground．'Thank heaven，I think I hear him coming．'
　　Then we heard quick footsteps on the path．After a few moments，Sir Henry appeared out of the fog and walked on in the clear moonlight．He came quickly along the path，passed close to where we were hidden，and began to walk up the hill behind us．As he walked，he looked over his shoulder again and again，like a man who is worried that something is following him．
　　'Listen！'said Holmes sharply．'Look out！It's coming！'
　　I heard him make his revolver ready to fire，and I did the same．
　　There was a sound of quick，light footsteps from inside the curtain of fog．The thick cloud had crept to within fifty metres of where we were hidden．We tried to see into it，and wondered what horrible thing would appear．I looked at Holmes．His eyes were fixed on the place where the path disappeared into the fog．He was pale，but his eyes were bright．He looked like a man who was going to win the most important game of his life．Then suddenly his eyes nearly jumped out of his head，and his mouth opened in frightened surprise．I looked away from him to see what his eyes were fixed on．When I saw the awful shape that was coming towards us out of the fog，my blood turned cold．The revolver nearly fell from my hands，and my whole body froze with fear．
　　I saw a hound，an enormous black hound．It was bigger than any dog I had ever seen．But it was something else that filled us with terror．No human eye had ever seen a hound like this one．Fire came from its open mouth．Its eyes were burning．Flames covered its head and body．It was a more horrible sight than anyone could imagine—a hell-hound sent by the devil．It was not a creature of the natural world．
　　The huge，black，burning hound ran quickly and silently after Sir Henry．Far away along the path we saw him turn and look back at the hound．His face was white in the moonlight and his hands were lifted in horror．He watched helplessly as the terrible creature got closer to him．We were so frozen bythe ghostly and unnatural sight that we let the hound go past us，and we could not move．Our friend was near to death，and we were helpless with fear．






■ 17 The Search for the Murderer
　　Then our fear for Sir Henry became greater than our ter- ror．Holmes and I fired our revolvers together．The creature gave a loud cry of pain，and we knew we had hit it．But it did not stop，and ran on，after Sir Henry．
　　When we heard the cry of pain，our fears disappeared．This was no supernatural hound．Our bullets could hurt it，and we could kill it．We ran after it as fast as we could．I have never seen anyone run as quickly as Holmes ran that night，and I could not keep up with him．In front of us on the path we heard scream after scream from Sir Henry，and the deep voice of the hound．I saw the creature jump at Sir Henry and throw him to the ground．Its teeth went for his throat．But the next moment Holmes had emptied his revolver into the hound's body．It gave a last deep cry，its teeth closed on the empty air，and it fell to the ground．I put my revolver to its head，but I did not need to fire．The hound was dead．
　　Sir Henry lay unconscious where he had fallen．Quickly we opened the neck of his shirt．Holmes had fired just in time，and the hound's teeth had not reached our friend's throat．Already his eyes were beginning to open and he looked up at us．
　　'My God，'he whispered．'What was it？What in heaven's name was it？'
　　'It's dead，whatever it was，'said Holmes．'We've killed the family ghost for ever．'
　　The creature that lay before us was as large as a small lion．Its mouth and teeth were huge．They shone with blue flames．There were rings of blue fire round its cruel eyes，too．I touched the hound's burning coat．When I held up my hand，it，too，seemed to be on fire．
　　'Phosphorus，'I said，'That is why the hound appears to burn in the dark．Stapleton put phosphorous paint on the hound in the hut beside the house．'
　　But Holmes was thinking more about Sir Henry than about Stapleton's cleverness．
　　'I must apologize to you，Sir Henry，'he said．'I put your life in danger．I expected to see a huge hound，but not a crea- ture like this．The fog gave us a very short time to control our fear，and for moments we could not move．'
　　'Never mind，'said Sir Henry．'You saved my life，and I thank you．Please help me stand up．What are you going to do now？'
　　Sir Henry's legs were shaking so much from his terrible ex- perience that he could not stand．We helped him to a rock．He sat there and held his head in his hands．
　　'We must leave you here，Sir Henry，and try to catch Staple- ton．We shall come back as quickly as possible and take you to the Hall．Our case is complete，but we must now catch our man．'
　　I followed Holmes along the path back to the house．
　　'We must search the house，'said Holmes，'but almost cer- tainly he won't be there．He probably heard the noise of our guns，so he knows his evil game is finished．'
　　The front door of the house was open．We went in and looked from room to room．All the rooms downstairs were empty，so we went upstairs and looked in all the rooms except one，which was locked．
　　'There's someone in there，'I said．'I heard someone move．Help me break open this door．'
　　We threw ourselves against the door，and as the lock broke we went in．We held our revolvers ready to fire．
　　In the middle of the room was a figure tied to a post．We could not see whether it was a man or a woman，as it was com- pletely covered with sheets．Only the eyes and nose were free．
　　We pulled off the sheets and untied the prisoner from the post．It was Miss Stapleton．As we untied her，we could see long red bruises across her neck．
　　'That cruel devil Stapleton has beaten her，'Holmes said．'Put her into a chair．'Miss Stapleton had fainted from the beating and exhaustion．As we put her into the chair，she opened her eyes．
　　'Is he safe？'she asked．'Has he escaped？'
　　'He cannot escape us，Miss Stapleton，'Holmes said．
　　'No，no，I don't mean my husband．I mean Sir Henry．Is he safe？'
　　'Yes，'I said，'and the hound is dead．'
　　'Thank God，'she said．'Thank God．Oh，the cruel devil．Look what he has done to me．'She showed us her arms，and　we saw with horror that her skin was black and blue where she had been beaten．'But he has hurt me more in other ways．While I thought he loved me，I accepted many things．But he doesn't love me．He has used me．'
　　'Then help us now，'said Holmes．'Tell us where he has gone．'
　　'There is an old house on an island in the middle of the marsh，'she said．'He kept his hound there．He also had the house ready in case he needed to escape．He will be there，I'm sure．'
　　'Nobody could find his way into the Grimpen Marsh in this fog tonight，'said Holmes，looking out of the window．
　　The fog lay like white wool against the glass，and we knew we could not try to follow him until it cleared．We decided to take Sir Henry back to Baskerville Hall．We had to tell him everything about the Stapletons，and he was deeply hurt when he heard the truth about the woman he loved．The news that she was married，and the awful fear he had experienced，brought on a fever．We sent for Dr Mortimer，who came and sat with Sir Henry throughout the night．
　　On the following morning Miss Stapleton took us to the path through the marsh．The fog had lifted，and she showed us the sticks which she and her husband had put in to mark the way．We followed them through the marsh，which smelled of dying plants．The wet ground pulled at our feet as we walked．From time to time one of us stepped from the path and sank up to his waist in the marsh．One man on his own could not hope to escape the pull of the marsh；without help he would sink to his death．
　　But we did not find any sign of Stapleton．We searched andsearched without success．There is no doubt that he lost hisway in the fog，and sank in the marsh Somewhere，deep down，his body lies to this day．
　　We reached the island Miss Stapleton had described，and searched the old house．
　　'This place tells us nothing that we do not already know，'said Holmes．'These bones show that he hid the hound here，but he could not keep it quiet，so people heard its cries．Here is the bottle of phosphorous paint．Stapleton used it very cleverly on the hound．After what we saw and felt last night，we cannot be surprised that Sir Charles died of fright．And now I under- stand how Selden knew that the hound was following him in the dark．It's not surprising the poor man screamed and ran as he did．The old story of the supernatural hound probably gave Stapleton the idea of using phosphorus．Very clever．I said it in London and I say it again，Watson．We have never had a more dangerous enemy than the one who is lying out there'—and he pointed to the great marsh that was all round us．






■ 18 Looking Back
　　It was the end of November，more than a month after ourreturn from Baskerville Hall．Holmes and I were sitting on either side of a bright fire in our sitting room in Baker Street．Since our return，Holmes had been working hard on two other cases，and he had been too busy to discuss the Baskerville case．But now the other cases were finished，and he had been successful in both of them．I decided it was a good time to ask him the final questions about Stapleton and the hound．
　　'The picture showed us that Stapleton was indeed a Baskerville，'Holmes began．'He was the son of Roger Baskerville，who was Sir Charles'younger brotner．Roger was a criminal who escaped from prison and ran away to South America．Everyone thought he had died unmarried，but that was not true．He had one son，also called Roger，whom we knew as Stapleton．Stapleton married a beautiful South Ameri- can，and came to England，where he started a school in the north．He discovered that he would inherit the Baskerville lands and fortune if Sir Charles and Sir Henry both died．That is why he moved to Devonshire when the school closed．
　　'When he met Sir Charles，he heard the story of the hell- hound．He also learned that Sir Charles believed these super- natural stories，and that he had a weak heart．
　　'Stapleton had the idea of buying a huge hound，and of using the phosphorus to make it shine like the hound in the story．I have found the place where he bought the animal．He took it by train to Devonshire and walked many miles over the moors with it so that it would not be seen near Baskerville Hall．
　　'He needed to get Sir Charles out of the Hall at night．This would be easy to do if his wife made Sir Charles fall in love with her．But，although he beat her，she refused to help him with his evil plan．
　　'Then Stapleton met Laura Lyons．We know that he made her write a letter to bring Sir Charles to the moor gate on that sad night．The hound，which was shining with phosphorus，chased Sir Charles down the Yew Alley．Sir Charles' terror was so great that his weak heart stopped，and he died，but the animal did not touch the dead body．
　　'The hound had run on the grass，so it left no footprints，ex- cept the one found by Dr Mortimer．You see how clever Staple- ton was．Neither he nor the hound had touched Sir Charles so there was no sign of murder．The only two people who might suspect him—his wife and Mrs Lyons could not be certain about what he had done．Anyway，neither of them would in- form the police about him．
　　'Next，Stapleton learned that Sir Henry had reached Eng- land，so he went to London．He hoped to murder Sir Henry there．He took his wife with him，but he wasn't sure that she would keep his secret，so he did not tell her the truth．He locked her up in their hotel．She knew that he had some evil plan，but she was too frightened to give Sir Henry a clear warning．Instead，she sent him the letter made of words cut from a newspaper．
　　'Meanwhile，Stapleton was wearing a false beard and fol- lowing Sir Henry．He needed something to give the hound Sir Henry's scent，so he paid a maid at Sir Henry's hotel to steal one of his shoes The first one was a new one，and didn't have Sir Henry's scent on it．It was no use for the hound，so he put it back，and another，older，shoe was stolen．When the shoes were changed，I knew that the hound must be a natural and not a supernatural creature．
　　'Next there was the letter made of words cut from a news- paper．When I looked at it，I held it close to my eyes．I noticed a smell of perfume，so I guessed that a woman had sent the let- ter．
　　'By the time I went to Devonshire I knew that there was a real hound，and I knew we were looking for a man and a wom- an．I guessed that the Stapletons were the pair．I had to watch Stapleton，but I had to hide myself As I have explained．I could not tell you what I was doing．I stayed in Newtown and used the hut on the moor only when necessary．
　　'Your letters were sent to me immediately from Baker Street，and were very helpful．When you told me that Stapleton had owned a school in the north of England．I checked on him and where he had come from．I discovered he had come from South America．And then everything became clear．
　　'By the time you found me on the moor，I knew everything，but I could prove nothing．We had to catch the man doing something criminal，and so I had to put Sir Henry in danger．
　　'Dr Mortimer tells me that Sir Henry will be completely better after some rest．As you know，the two of them have be- come good friends，and are going on a long holiday together．Sir Henry will take some time to forget Miss Stapleton．He loved her deeply and it hurt him badly when he learned the truth about her．
　　'She was very frightened of her cruel husband，but she sus- pected that he was responsible for Sir Charles' death．She knew about the hound，and when Selden died she guessed that the hound had killed him．She knew her husband had the hound at their house on the night Sir Henry came to dinner．They argued about the hound that evening，and as they argued Stapleton told her about Mrs Lyons．Any love she had for her husband disappeared at that moment．He knew that she want- ed to help Sir Henry，so he beat her and tied her up．
　　'He probably hoped that when he inherited the Baskerville lands，she would love him again．He certainly thought that she would keep silent if she became Lady Baskerville．But I think he was wrong．He had been too cruel to her．She could not for- give him or love him again，nor，I think，allow him to enjoy the results of his crime．
　　'Of course，he could not frighten Sir Henry in the same way as Sir Charles．Sir Henry was a young and healthy man．So he kept the hound hungry．He knew that the animal would either kill Sir Henry or would hurt him so badly that it would be easy to complete the murder．'
　　I had one last question for Holmes．'But Stapleton was living so close to Baskerville Hall and using a false name．It looked very strange．How would he explain that to the police，if after Sir Henry's death he then inherited the Baskerville lands and fortune？'
　　'I don't know how he planned to explain the false name and why he was living at Pen House，'said Holmes．'I can only say that he was a very clever man．I am sure he had thought of an answer to the problem．
　　'But that's enough work for the evening，Watson．I have two tickets for the theatre．If we get ready now，we shall have time to stop at my favourite restaurant for some dinner on the way．'




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Unquiet Grave by M.R.James





■ The Picture
　　For several years Mr Williams worked for the museum at the University of Oxford，enlarging its already famous collection of drawings and pictures of English country houses and churches．It is hard to imagine anything less alarming than collecting pictures of houses and churches，but Mr Williams found that even this peaceful work had its unexpected dark corners．
　　He bought many pictures for the museum from the London shop of Mr J．W．Britnell．Twice a year Mr Britnell sent a list of pictures to all his regular customers，who could then choose which pictures they wanted to look at before deciding whether to buy．
　　In February 1895 Mr Williams received a list from Mr Britnell with the following letter：
　　Dear Sir，
　　I think you might be interested in Picture Number 978 in our list，which I will be happy to send to you if you wish．
　　J．W．Britnell
　　Mr Williams turned to Number 978 in the list and found the following note：
　　Number 978．Artist unknown．Picture of an English country house，early nineteenth century．25 centimetres by 40 centimetres．￡20．
　　It did not sound very interesting and the price seemed high． However，Mr Williams added it to the pictures that he asked Mr Britnell to send to him．
　　The pictures arrived at the museum one Saturday afternoon， just after Mr Williams had left．They were brought round to his rooms in college so that he could look at them over the weekend．Mr Williams found them on his table when he and his friend，Mr Binks，came in to have tea．
　　Picture Number978 showed the front of quite a large country house．It had three rows of windows with the door in the middle of the bottom row．There were trees on both sides of the house and a large lawn in front of it．The letters A．W．F． were written in the corner of the picture．Mr Williams thought that it was not very well done，probably the work of an amateur artist，and he could not understand why Mr Britnell thought it was worth twenty pounds．He turned it over and saw that there was a piece of paper on the back with part of a name on it．All he could read were the ends of two lines of Writing The first said，'—ngly Hall'；the second，'—ssex'．
　　Mr Williams thought that it would be interesting to see if he could find the name of the house in one of his guidebooks be－ fore sending the picture back on Monday morning． Meanwhile，he put the picture on the table，lit the lamp because it was now getting dark，and made the tea．
　　While they were having tea，his friend picked up the picture，looked at it and said，Where's this house， Williams？'
　　'That's just what I was going to find out，'said Williams， taking a book from the shelf．'If you look at the back，you'll see it's Something Hall in either Essex or Sussex．Half the name's missing，you see．I don't suppose you recognize the house，do you？'
　　'No，I don't，'said Mr Binks．'It's from Britnell，'I suppose，isn't it？Is it for the museum？'
　　'Well，I would buy it if the price was two pounds，'replied Mr Williams，'but for some reason he wants twenty pounds for it．I can't think why．It's not a very good picture and there aren't even any figures in it to make it more interesting．'
　　'I agree it's not worth twenty pounds，'said Binks，'but I don't think it's too bad．The light seems rather good to me and I think there is a figure here，just at the edge，in the front．'
　　'Let me see，'said Williams．'Well，it's true the light is quite well done．Where's the figure？Oh，yes！Just the head， in the very front of the picture．'
　　And indeed there was——right on the edge of the picture— just the head of a man or a woman，who was looking towards the house．Williams had not noticed it before．
　　'Still，'he said，'though it's better than I thought at first， I can't spend twenty pounds of the museum's money on a picture of a house I don't even know．'
　　Mr Binks，who had some work to finish，soon left and Mr Williams spent the time before dinner trying to find the name of the house in his guidebooks．
　　'If I knew the letter before the“—ngly”，'he said to himself，'it would be easy enough．But there are many more names ending in“—ngly”than I thought．'
　　Dinner in Mr Williams'college was at seven o'clock and afterwards a few of his friends came back to his rooms to play cards．During a pause in the game Mr Williams picked up the picture from the table without looking at it and passed it to a man named Garwood，who was interested in pictures．Garwood looked at it and said：
　　'This is really a very fine picture，you know，Williams． The light is very well done，in my opinion，and though the figure is rather unpleasant，it is quite interesting．'
　　'Yes，isn't it？'said Williams，who was too busy giving drinks to his guests to look at the picture again．
　　When his visitors had gone，Williams had to finish writing a letter，so it was after midnight before he was ready to go to bed．The picture lay face upwards on the table where Garwood had left it and，as Williams was putting out the lamp，he saw it．For a moment he was too surprised to move，then he slowly picked up the picture and stared at it in horror．In the middle of the lawn，in front of the unknown house，there was a figure where there had been no figure earlier．It was crawling on hands and knees towards the house，and it was covered in a strange black garment with a white cross on the back．
　　After a second or two Mr Williams took the picture by one corner and carried it to an empty room．There，he locked it， face downwards，in a cupboard，then closed and locked the door of the empty room．He went back to his own room and locked the door behind him．Before going to bed，he sat down and wrote a note describing in detail the extraordinary change in the picture since he had received it．
　　He was glad to remember that Mr Garwood，who had looked at the picture earlier in the evening，had also seen a 'rather unpleasant'figure．He decided that in the morning he must ask someone to look carefully at the picture with him， and he must try very hard to discover the name of the house． He would ask his neighbour，Mr Nisbet，to have breakfast with him．Then he would spend the morning looking for the house in his guidebooks．
　　Mr Nisbet arrived at nine o'clock and the two men sat down to breakfast．When they had finished，Mr Williams，feeling both nervous and excited，hurried to the empty room．He unlocked the cupboard，took out the picture，still face down- wards，and，without looking at it，went back to his own room and put it into Nisbet's hands．
　　'Now，Nisbet，'he said，'I want you to tell me what you see in that picture．Describe it，please，in detail．I'll tell you why afterwards．'
　　'Well，'said Nisbet，'I have here a picture of an English country house by moonlight．'
　　'Moonligh？Are you sure？'
　　'Oh，yes．The moon is shown quite clearly and there are clouds in the sky．'
　　'All right．Go on．But I'm sure，'added Williams quietly， 'that there was no moon when I first saw it．'
　　'Well，there's not much more I can say，'Nisbet continued． 'The house has three rows of windows，five in each row，except at the bottom，where there's a door instead of the middle one and…'
　　'But what about figures？'said Williams with great interest．
　　'Figures？'replied Nisbet．'There aren't any．'
　　'What？No figure on the grass in front？'
　　'No．Not a thing．'
　　'Are you sure？'
　　'Of course I am．But there's one other thing．'
　　'What's that？'
　　'One of me windows on the ground floor，on the left of the door，is open．'
　　'Is it really？Oh dear！I suppose he's got into the house，' said Williams，with great excitement．
　　He hurried across to where Nisbet was sitting and，taking the picture from him，saw for himself．It was quite true． There was no figure on the lawn，and there was the open win- dow．
　　For a moment williams was too surprised to speak，then he sat down at his desk and wrote for a few minutes．When he had finished，he brought two papers across to Nisbet．He asked him to sign the first one，which was Nisbet's own de－ scription of the picture，then to read the other one，which was the note Williams had written the night before．
　　'What can it all mean？'asked Nisbet．
　　'That's what I must find out，'said Williams．'Now，there are three things I must do．First，I must ask Garwood exactly what he saw when he looked at the picture last night，then I must have the picture photographed before it goes any further and，thirdly，I must find out where this house is．'
　　'I can take the photograph for you myself，'said Nisbet． 'But，you know，I think we are seeing something terrible happening here．The question is，has it already happened or is it going to happen？You really must find out where this house is．'He looked at the picture again and shook his head．'I think you are right，you know．He has got in．I'm sure there will be some trouble in that house．'
　　'I'll tell you what I'll do，'said Williams．'I'll show the picture to old Doctor Green．He grew up in Essex and he often goes to Sussex to see his brother who lives there．He's been going there for years．He must know both places quite well．'
　　'That's a very good idea，'agreed Nisbet．'But I think I heard Green say that he was going away this weekend．'
　　'You're right，said Williams．'I remember now—he's gone to Brighton for the weekend．I'll leave a note asking him to see me as soon as he returns．Meanwhile，you take the picture and photograph it and I'll see Garwood and ask him what he saw when he looked at it last night．'He paused．'You know，'he added，'I don't think twenty pounds is too much to ask for this picture，after all．'
　　In a short time Williams returned to his room，bringing Mr Garwood with him．Mr Garwood said that when he had looked at the picture the figure was just starting to crawl across the lawn．He remembered that it was wearing a black garment with something white on the back—he was not sure if it was a cross．While he was writing this down，Mr Nisbet returned and said that he had photographed the picture．
　　'What are you going to do now，Williams？'asked Mr Gar－ wood．'Are you going to sit and watch the picture all day？'
　　'No，I don't think we need to do that，'replied Williams．
　　'You see，there has been plenty of time since I looked at it last night for the creature in the picture to finish what he wants to do，but he has only gone into the house．The window is open and he must still be in there．I think he wants us to see what happens next．Anyway，I don't think the picture will change much during the day．I suggest that we all go for a walk after lunch and come back here for tea．I'll leave the picture on my table and lock the door．My servant has a key and can get in if he wants to，but nobody else can．'
　　The others agreed that this was a good plan．They also wanted to avoid talking to anyone about this extraordinary picture，knowing what excitement and argument it would cause．
　　At about five o'clock they came back to Mr Williams' rooms for tea．When they entered the room，they were surprised to find Mr Filcher，the servant，sitting in Mr Williams' armchair and staring in horror at the picture on the table．Mr Filcher had worked in the college for many years and had never before behaved in so unusual a way．He seemed to feel this himself，and tried to jump to his feet when the three men came in．
　　'I'm sorry，sir，'he said．'I didn't mean to sit down．'
　　'That's all right，Robert，'said Mr Williams．'I was going to ask you some time what you thought of that picture．'
　　'Well，sir，'replied the servant，'of course，I don't really understand pictures，but I wouldn't like my little girl to see it．I'm sure it would give her bad dreams．It doesn't seem the right kind of picture to leave lying around．It could frighten anybody—seeing that awful thing carrying off the poor baby． That's what I think，sir．Will you need me any more today， sir？Thank you，sir．'
　　Filcher left the room and the three men went at once to look at the picture．There was the house as before，under the moon and the clouds．But the window that had been open was now shut，and the figure was once more on the lawn；but not crawling this time．Now it was walking，with long steps，to－ wards the front of the picture．The moon was behind it and the black material of its garment nearly covered its face．The three men were deeply thankful that they could see no more of the face than a high，white forehead and a few long，thin hairs．Its legs beneath the garment were borribly thin，and its arms held something which seemed to be a child，whether dead or living it was not possible to say．
　　The three friends watched the picture until it was time for dinner but it did not change at all．They hurried back to Williams'rooms as soon as dinner was finished．The picture was where they had left it，but the figure had gone，and the house was quiet under the moon and the clouds．
　　'Well，'said Mr Williams，'now we really must try to find where this house is．'They got out the guidebooks and began to work．
　　It was nearly two hours later when Williams suddenly cried， 'Ha！This looks like it！'
　　He read aloud from the Cuide to Essex that he was holding：
　　'Anningly．Interesting twelfth－century church containing the tombs of the Francis family，whose home，Anningly Hall， stands just behind the church．The family is now extinct．The last member of the family disappeared very mysteriously in 1802 while still a child．His father，Sir Arthur Francis，a well－known amateur artist，lived quite alone after that until he was found dead in his house three years later，after he had just completed a picture of the Hall．'
　　As Mr Williams finished reading，there was a knock on the door and Doctor Green came in．He had just returned from Brighton and had found Williams'note．He agreed at once that the picture was of Anningly Hall，which was not far from where he had grown up．
　　'Have you any explanation of the figure，Green？'asked Williams．
　　'I don't know，I'm sure，Williams，'Doctor Green replied．
　　'When I was a boy，some of the old people in Anningly still used to talk about the disappearance of the Francis child．They said that Sir Arthur had a lot of trouble with some of the local people coming onto his land to steal his fish and his birds． He decided to catch them all and have them punished，and，one by one he did，until there was only one left．This was a man called Gawdy whose family had once been rich and important in that part of Essex．In fact，some of them had their tombs in the village church too．However，the family had lost all their land and their money over the years and Gawdy felt rather bitter about it all．For a long time Sir Arthur could not catch him doing anything wrong until one night his men found Gawdy with some dead birds in Sir Arthur's woods．There was a fight and one of the men was shot．This was just what Sir Arthur needed；the judge was all on his side，of course，and poor Gawdy was hanged a few days later．People thought that some friend of Gawdy's stole Sir Arthur's little boy in revenge， to put an end to the Francis family as well．But I should say now，that it looks more as if old Gawdy managed the job him－ self．Brrrr．I don't like to think about it．Let's have a drink， shall we？'
　　The story of the picture was told to a few people；some believed it and some did not．Mr Britnell knew nothing about it except that the picture was unusual in some way．It is now in the museum and，although it has been carefully watched，no one has ever seen it change again．






■ Rats
　　'And if you walked through the bedrooms now，you'd see the dirty grey bedsheets rising and falling like the waves of the sea．'
　　'Rising and falling with what？'
　　'Why，with the rats crawling underneath them．'
　　But was it rats？I ask，because in another story it was not．I cannot put a date to the story，but I was young when I heard it，and the teller was old．
　　It happened in Suffolk，at a place where the coast road climbs a little hill as it travels northwards．At the top of the hill，on the left，stands a tall narrow house built about 1770． Behind it are the gardens and other buildings，and in front lies open heath with a view of the distant sea．The house was once a well-known inn，though I believe few people stay there now．
　　To this inn came Mr Thomson，a young man from the University of Cambridge，in search of peace and pleasant surroundings in which to study．He found both；the innkeeper and his wife kept a comfortable house，and Mr Thomson was the only guest．
　　It was fine spring weather and Mr Thomson's days passed very happily．His plan was to stay a month：studying all morning，walking on the heath in the afternoon，and talking with the local people in the bar in the evening．
　　On one of his walks over the heath he came upon a large white stone with a square hole in the top．No doubt it had once held a post of some kind．He looked around him at the wide，open heath and beyond that，the sea shining in the bright sunlight and decided that the stone had probably once held a sign to guide the local sailors back to their homes．
　　In the bar that evening he spoke of the stone and his idea that it had，perhaps，once held a sign to guide sailors．
　　'Yes，'said Mr Betts，the innkeeper，'I've heard they could see it from out at sea，but whatever was there fell down long before our time．'
　　'A good thing it did，too，'said one of the villagers．'It wasn't a lucky sign-that's what the old men used to say． Not lucky for the fishing，I mean．'
　　'Why ever not？'said Thomson．
　　'Well，I never saw it myself，'answered the other．'But those old fishermen had some strange ideas，and I wouldn't be surprised if they pulled it down themselves．'
　　It was impossible to get anything clearer than this，and people soon began to talk about something else．
　　One day Mr Thomson decided not to have a walk in the afternoon，but to continue studying．He returned to his room after an early lunch and read on until about three o'clock．Then he put down his book，rose and went out into the passage， thinking that he would have a rest for five minutes．The house was completely silent．He remembered that it was market day and everyone had gone into the local town．
　　As he stood there，the idea came to him to look at the four other rooms along the passage．He was sure that the Bettses would not mind．The room opposite his was big but had no view of the sea．The next two were both smaller than his with only one window each——his had two．He walked down the passage to the door at the end and found that it was locked． Thomson decided that he must see inside that room；perhaps the key of his room would unlock the door．It did not，so he fetched the keys from the other three rooms and tried them． One of them fitted the lock and he opened the door．
　　The room had two windows looking south and west，and hot bright sunshine filled the room．Here there was no carpet， only wooden floorboards；no pictures，no furniture，except a bed in the farther corner—a metal bed covered with a bluishgrey blanket．You could not imagine a more ordinary room， but there was something that made Thomson close the door very quickly and very quietly behind him，and then lean against the wall in the passage，trembling all over．
　　Under the blanket someone lay，and not only lay，but moved．It was certainly some one and not some thing，be－ cause the shape of the head and body was clear under the blanket．However，it was all covered，and no one lies with covered head except a dead person；and this was not dead，not truly dead，because it was moving and shaking．
　　Thomson tried to tell himself that he was imagining things， but on this bright sunny day that was impossible．What should he do？First，lock the door again．With a trembling hand he turned the key in the lock，but as he did so，it made a little noise，and at once soft footsteps were heard coming towards the door．Thomson ran to his room and locked himself in，although he knew it was useless．How could doors and locks stop what he suspected？He stood listening for several minutes，but no sound came from the passage．
　　Now he could not think what to do．He wanted to pack his bags and leave the inn at once，but only that morning he had told Mr and Mrs Betts that he would stay for another week．If he left suddenly，they would surely guess the reason．Then he thought，either the Bettses knew about the creature in that room but still stayed in the house，or they knew nothing about it．Perhaps they knew just enough to make them keep the room locked，but not enough to make them leave the house． In any case，they did not seem to be afraid of whatever was in that room，so why should he be afraid of it？He decided to stay another week as he had arranged．
　　As the days passed，Thomson listened hard for sounds from the room at the end of the passage，but he heard nothing．Of course he could not ask Mr or Mrs Betts about it，and he did not think he could ask anyone else．However，he wanted very much to find some kind of explanation，so he decided that he would try to see inside the locked room once again before he left the inn．
　　He made a simple plan．He would arrange to leave by an afternoon train and would have his luggage put on the cart for the station．Then，just before leaving，he would go back upstairs to make sure that he had not left anything behind．But， instead of going to his own room，he would go to the other． He put oil on the key to make it easier to open the door quietly．
　　His last day arrived．After lunch his luggage was taken downstairs and put on the cart for the station．Mr and Mrs Betts came to the front door to say goodbye．Thomson thanked them for making him so comfortable and they thanked him for staying with them．Then，as he had planned，Thomson said：
　　'I'll just check that I haven't left a book or anything in my room．No，please don't worry，I can do it myself．'
　　He hurried up the stairs to the locked room，turned the key quietly and opened the door．He almost laughed aloud．Leaning，or perhaps sitting，on the edge of the bed was—nothing more than an ordinary scarecrow！A scarecrow out of the garden，of course，just put away in the empty room…
　　Yes；but suddenly amusement stopped．Do scarecrows have bony feet？Do their heads roll from side to side on their shoulders？Have they got heavy metal chains around their necks？ Can they get up and move across the floor，with rolling head and arms close at their sides… and shake with the cold？
　　Thomson shut the door with a bang，jumped down the stairs and fell in a faint at the door of the inn．When he became con- scious again，Mr Betts was standing over him with a glass of whisky and a serious face．
　　'You shouldn't do it，sir，'said Betts．'You shouldn't go looking into people's secrets，especially when they've done their best to make you comfortable．'
　　Thomson said that he was very sorry but the innkeeper and his wife found it hard to accept his apologies．
　　'Who knows what damage it will do to the good name of the inn？'said Mr Betts，and his wife agreed．
　　At last Thomson managed to make Mr and Mrs Betts believe that he would not say anything about what he had seen．By that time he had missed his train but he decided to go into town and spend the night at the Station Hotel．
　　Before he went，Mr Betts told him what little he knew．
　　'They say he used to be the innkeeper here many years ago， and he worked with the thieves who robbed and murdered travellers on the heath．That's why he was hanged——in chains，they say，up at the gallows on that white stone you saw．Yes，the fishermen pulled the gallows down，I bleieve， because they saw it out at sea，and they said it kept the fish away．We heard all this from the peple who sold us the inn． “You keep that room shut up，”they said，“but don't move the bed out，and you'll find there won't be any trouble．”And we haven't had any trouble．He hasn't once come out into the house，though who knows what he might do now？I've never seen him myself，and I don't want to．But I do hope you'll keep it a secret，sir．If word gets out，people won't want to come and stay here，will they？'
　　The promise of silence was kept for many years．I heard the story when Mr Thomson，now an old man，came to stay with my father．I was told to take him up to his room，but when we got there，Mr Thomson stepped forward and threw the door open himself．He stood there in the doorway for some moments，looking carefully into every corner of the room．
　　Then he turned to me．'I beg your pardon，'he said．'A strange way to behave，I know．But there is a very good reason for it．'
　　A few days later I heard what the reason was，and you have heard it now．






■ Casting the Runes
　　15th April 1902
　　Dear Mr Karswell
　　I am turning your paper on'The Truth of Alchemy'， which you have kindly offered to read at our next club meeting．Unfortunately，we do not feel able to accept your offer．
　　W．Gayton，Secretary
　　18th April 1902
　　Dear Mr Karswell
　　I am afraid that I am not able to arrange a meeting with you to discuss your offer to read a paper on alchemy．However， the club considered your offer most carefully，and we did not refuse it until we had asked for the opinion of an expert in these matters．
　　W．Gayton，Secretary
　　20th April 1902
　　The Secretary writes to inform Mr Karswell that it is impossible for him to give the name of any person or persons who were asked for an opinion on Mr Karswell's paper on alchemy．The Secretary also wishes to say that he cannot reply to any further letters on this matter．
　　'And who is Mr Karswell？'asked the Secretary's wife．She had called at his office and had just picked up and read the last of these letters．
　　'Well，my dear，'replied her husband，'just at present Mr Karswell is a very angry man．All I know abut him is that he's rich，lives at Lufford Abbey in Warwickshire，and considers himself to be an alchemist．And I don't want to meet him for the next week or two．Now，shall we go？'
　　'What have you been doing to make him angry？'asked the Secretary's wife．
　　'The usual thing，my dear．He sent us a paper which he wanted to read at our next meeting．We showed it to Edward Dunning—almost the only man in England who knows about these things—and he said it was no good，so we refused it． Now Karswell wants to see me about it and to find out whose opinion we asked for．Well，you've seen my reply to that．Of course，you mustn't say anything about it to anyone．'
　　'You know very well that I would never do a thing like that．Indeed，I hope he doesn't discover that it was poor Mr Dunning．'
　　'Why do you say“poor”Mr Dunning？'said the Secretary． 'He's a very happy man and quite rich，I believe．He has a comfortable home and plenty of time to spend on his hobbies．'
　　'I only meant that I would be sorry for him if Mr Karswell discovered his name and made trouble for him．'
　　'Oh yes！He would be poor Mr Dunning then，'agreed her husband．The Secretary and his wife were lunching with friends that day，a Mr and Mrs Bennett，who came from Warwickshire． Mrs Gayton decided to ask them if they knew Mr Karswell． However，before she could do so，Mrs Bennett said to her hus－ band：
　　'I saw Mr Karswell this morning．He was coming out of the British Museum as I was driving past．'
　　'Did you really？'said her husband．'I wonder what brings him up to London．'
　　'Is he a friend of yours？'asked the Secretary，smiling at his wife．
　　'Oh no！'said Mr and Mrs Bennett together．
　　'He's one of our neighbours in Warwickshire，'explained Mrs Bennett，'but he's not at all popular．Nobody knows what he does with his time and they say he believes in all kinds of strange and unpleasant things．If he thinks you have been impolite to him，he never forgets it，and he never does anything kind for his neighbours．'
　　'But，my dear，'said her husband，'you're forgetting the Christmas party he gave for the children．'
　　'Oh no，I'm not，'replied his wife．'That's a good exam－ ple of what I mean．'She turned to the Secretary and his wife．
　　'The first winter he was at Lufford this horrible man invited all the village children to a Christmas party at his house．He said that he had some of these new moving pictures to show them．Everyone was rather surprised because they thought hat he didn't like children；he used to be very angry if any of the village children came on to his land．However，the chil－ dren all went and a friend of ours，Mr Farrer，went with them to see that everything was all right．'
　　'And was it？'asked the Secretary．
　　'Indeed it was not！'replied Mrs Bennett．'Our friend said it was obvious that Mr Karswell wanted to frighten the children to death，and he very nearly did so．The first film was “Red Riding Hood”，and the wolf was so terrible that several of the smaller children had to leave the room．The other films were more and more frightening．At the end Mr Karswell showed a film of a little boy in the park surrounding Lufford Abbey—every child in the room could recognize the place． There was a horrible creature in white following the little boy． At first you could see it hiding in the trees，then it became clearer and clearer and at last it caught the little boy and pulled him to pieces．Our friend said that it gave him some very bad dreams，so you can imagine how the children felt．Of course， this was too much and Mr Farrer told Karswell that he must stop it．All Mr Karswell said was：“Oh！The dear children want to go home to bed，do they？Very well，just one last picture． ”
　　'And then he showed a short film of horrible creatures with wings and lots of legs．They seemed to be crawling out of the picture to get among the children．Of course，the children were terribly frightened and they all started screaming and running out of the room．Some of them were quite badly hurt because they were all trying to get out of the room at the same time．There was the most awful trouble in the village after- wards．Several of the fathers wanted to go to Lufford Abbey and break all the windows，but the gates were locked when they got there．So you see why Mr Karswell is not one of our friends．'
　　'Yes，'agreed her husband．'I think Karswell is a very dangerous man．I feel sorry for anyone who makes an enemy of him．'
　　'Is he the man，'asked the Secretary，'who wrote a History of Witchcraft about ten years ago？'
　　'Yes，that's the man，'replied Mr Bennett．'Do you re- member what the newspaers said about it？'
　　'Yes，I do，'said the Secretary．'They all said that it was a really bad book．In fact，I knew the man who wrote the sharpest report of them all．So did you，of course．You re- member John Harrington？He was at Cambridge with us．'
　　'Oh，very well indeed．But I had heard nothing of him between the time we left university and the day I read about his accident in the newspaper．'
　　'What happened to him？'asked one of the ladies．
　　'It was very strange，'said Mr Bennett．'He fell out of a tree and broke his neck．The mystery was why he had climbed the tree in the first place．There he was，an ordinary man walking home along a country road late one evening，and suddenly he began to run as fast as he could．Finally he climbed up a tree beside the road；a dead branch broke，he fell and was killed．When they found him the next morning，he had a terrible expression of fear on his face．It was quite clear that he had been chased by something and people talked about mad dogs and so on，but no one ever found the answer．That was in 1889 and ever since then his brother，Henry，who was also at Cambridge with us，has been trying to find out the truth of what happened．He thinks that someone wanted to harm his brother but，of course，he has never been able to prove anything．'
　　After a pause Mr Bennett asked the Secretary，'Did you ever read Karswell's History of Witchcraft？'
　　'Yes，I did，'said the Secretary．
　　'And was it as bad as Harrington said？'
　　'Oh yes．It was badly written but what it said was very bad too，although Karswell seemed to believe every word of what he was saying．'
　　'I didn't read the book but I remember what Harrington wrote about it，'said Mr Bennett．'If anyone wrote like that about one of my books，I would never write another，I'm sure．'
　　'I don't think Karswell feels the same way，'replied the Secretary．'But it's half past three；we must go．Thank you for an excellent lunch．'
　　On the way home Mrs Gayton said，'I hope that horrible man Karswell doesn't discover that it was Mr Dunning who said his paper was no good．'
　　'I don't think he's likely to do that，'replied her husband．'Dunning won't tell him and neither shall I．The only way Karswell might find out is by asking the people at the British Museum Library for the name of anyone who studies all their old books about alchemy．Let's hope he won't think of that．'
　　But Mr Karswell was a very clever man．
　　One evening，later in the same week，Mr Edward Dunning was returning from the British Museum Library，where he had been working all day，to his comfortable home．He lived alone there，except for the two women who cooked and cleaned for him．A train took him most of the way home，then he caught a bus for the last mile or two．He had finished reading his newspaper by the time he got on the bus so he amused himself by reading the different notices on the windows opposite him． He already knew most of them quite well，but there seemed to be a new one in the corner that he had not seen before．It was yellow with blue letters，and all he could read was the name 'John Harrington'．Soon the bus was nearly empty and he changed his seat so that he could read the rest of it．It said：
　　REMEMBER JOHN HARRINGTON OF THE LAURELS，ASHBROOKE， WARWICKSHIRE，WHO DIED 18TH SEPTEMBER 1889．HE WAS AL- LOWED THREE MONTHS．
　　Mr Dunning stared at this notice for a long time．He was the only passenger on the bus when it reached his stop，and as he was getting off，he said to the driver，'I was looking at that new notice on the window，the blue and yellow one．It's rather strange，isn't it？'
　　'Which one is that，sir？asked the driver．'I don't think I know it．'
　　'why，this one here，'said Mr Dunning，turning to point to it．Then he suddenly stopped—the window was now quite clear．The blue and yellow notice，with its strange message， had completely disappeared．
　　'But I'm sure…'Mr Dunning began，staring at the window．Then he turned back to the driver．'I'm sorry．Perhaps I imagined it，'he said．
　　He hurried off the bus and walked home，feeling rather worried．The notice had been there on the window；he was sure of it．But what possible explanation could there be for its disappearing like that？
　　The following afternoon Mr Dunning was walking from the British Museum to the station when he saw，some way ahead of him，a man holding some leaflets，ready to give to people as they passed．However，Mr Dunning did not see him give any- one a leaflet until he himself reached the place．One was pushed into his hand as he passed．The man's hand touched his，and gave Mr Dunning an unpleasant surprise．The hand seemed unnaturally rough and hot．As Mr Dunning walked on，he looked quickly at the leaflet and noticed the name Harrington．He stopped in alarm，and felt in his pocket for his glasses，but in that second someone took the leaflet out of his hand．He turned quickly—but whoever it was had disappeared，and so had the man with the leaflets．
　　The next day in the British Museum he was arranging his papers on the desk when he thought he heard his own name whispered behind him．He turned round hurriedly，knocking some of his papers on to the floor，but saw no one he recognized．He picked up his papers and was beginning to work when a large man at the table behind him，who was just getting up to leave，touched him on the shoulder．
　　'May I give you these？'he said，holding out a number of papers．'I think they must be yours．'
　　'Yes，they are mine．Thank you，'said Mr Dunning．A moment later the man had left the room．
　　Later，Mr Dunning asked the librarian if he knew the large man's name．
　　'Oh yes．that's Mr Karswell，'said the librarian．'In fact， he asked me the other day who were the experts on alchemy， so I told him that you were the only one in the country．I'll introduce you if you like；I'm sure he'd like to meet you．'
　　'No，no，please don't，'said Dunning．'He is someone I would very much prefer to avoid．'
　　On the way home from the museum Mr Dunning felt strangely unwell．Usually he looked forward to an evening spent alone with his books，but now he wanted to be with other people．Unfortunately，the train and the bus were unusually empty．When he reached his house，he was surprised to find the doctor waiting for him．
　　'I'm sorry，Dunning，'said the doctor．'I'm afraid I've had to send both your servants to hospital．'
　　'Oh dear！'said Mr Dunning．'What's the matter with them？'
　　'They told me they'd bought some fish for their lunch from a man who came to the door，and it has made them quite ill．'
　　'I'm very sorry to hear that，'said Mr Dunning．
　　'It's strange，'said the doctor．'I've spoken to the neighbours and no one else has seen anyone selling fish．Now，don't worry．They're not seriously ill，but I'm afraid they won't be home for two or three days．Why don't you come and have dinner with me this evening？Eight o'clock．You know where I live．'
　　Mr Dunning enjoyed his evening with the doctor and re- turned to his lonely house at half past eleven．He had got into bed and was almost asleep when he heard quite clearly the sound of his study door opening downstairs．Alarmed，he got out of bed，went to the top of the stairs，and listened．There were no sounds of movements or footsteps，but he suddenly felt warm，even hot，air round his legs．He went back and decided to lock himself into his room，and then suddenly，the electric lights all went out．He put out his hand to find the matches on the table beside the bed—and touched a mouth， with teeth and with hair around it，and not，he said later，the mouth of a human being．In less than a second he was in an- other room and had locked the door．And there he spent a miserable night，in the dark，expecting every moment to hear something trying to open the door．But nothing came．
　　When it grew light，he went nervously back into his bed- room and searched it．Everything was in its usual place．He searched the whole house，but found nothing．
　　It was a miserable day for Mr Dunning．He did not want to go to the British Museum in case he met Karswell，and he did not feel comfortable in the empty house．He spent half an hour at the hospital where he found that the two women were feeling much better．Then he decided to go to the Club for lunch． There，he was very glad to find his friend the Secretary and they had lunch together．He told Gayton that his servants were in hospital，but he was unwilling to speak of his other problems．
　　'You poor man，'said the Secretary．'We can't leave you alone with no one to cook your meals．You must come and stay with us．My wife and I will be delighted to have you．Go home after lunch and bring your things to my house this after- noon．No，I won't let you refuse．'
　　In fact，Mr Dunning was very happy to accept his friend's invitation．The idea of spending another night alone in his house was alarming him more and more．
　　At dinner that evening Mr Dunning looked so unwell that the Gaytons felt sorry for him and tried to make him forget his troubles．But later，when the two men were alone，Dunning became very quiet again．Suddenly he said：
　　'Gayton，I think that man Karswell knows that I was the person who advised you to refuse his paper．'
　　Gayton looked surprised．'What makes you think that？'he asked．
　　So Dunning explained．'I don't really mind，'he continued， 'but I believe that he's not a very nice person and it could be difficult if we met．'
　　After this Dunning sat in silence，looking more and more miserable．At last Gayton asked him if some serious trouble was worrying him．
　　'Oh！I'm so glad you asked，'said Dunning．'I feel I really must talk to someone about it．Do you know anything about a man named John Harrington？'
　　Very surprised，Gayton could only ask why he wanted to know．Then Dunning told him the whole story of the notice in the bus，the man with the leaflets，and what had happened in his own house．He ended by asking again if Gayton knew any- thing about John Harrington．
　　Now it was the Secretary who was worried and did not quite know how to answer．His friend was clearly in a very nervous condition，and the story of Harrington's death was alarming for anyone to hear．Was it possible that Karswell was involved with both men？In the end Gayton said only that he had known Harrington at Cambridge and believed that he had died suddenly in 1889．He added a few details about the man and his books．
　　Later，when they were alone，the Secretary discussed the matter with his wife．Mrs Gayton said immediately that Karswell must be the link between the two men，and she won- dered if Harrington's brother，Henry，could perhaps help Mr Dunning．She would ask the Bennetts where Henry Harrington lived，and then bring the two men together．
　　When they met，the first thing Dunning told Henry Harrington was of the strange ways in which he had learnt his brother's name．He described his other recent experiences and asked Harrington what he remembered about his brother be- fore he died．
　　John was in a very strange condition for some time before his death，it's true，replied Henry Harrington．Among other things，he felt that someone was following him all the time． I'm sure that someone was trying to harm him，and your story reminds me very much of the things he experienced．Could there be any link between you and my brother，do you think？'
　　'Well，'replied Dunning，there is just one thing．I'm told that your brother wrote some very hard things about a book not long before he died and，as it happens，I too have done something to annoy the man who wrote that book．'
　　'Don't tell me his name is Karswell，'said Harrington．
　　'Why yes，it is，'replied Dunning．
　　Henry Harrington looked very serious．
　　'Well，that is the final proof I needed，'he said．'Let me explain．I believe that my brother John was sure that this man Karswell was trying to harm him．Now，John was very fond of music．He often went to concerts in London，and always kept the concert programmes afterwards．About three months before he died，he came back from a concert and showed me the programme．
　　'“I nearly missed this one，”he said．“I couldn't find mine at the end of the concert and was looking everywhere for it. Then my neighbour offered me his，saying that he didn't need it any more．I don't know who he was—he was a very large man．”
　　'Soon after this my brother told me that he felt very uncomfortable at night．Then，one evening，he was looking through all his concert programmes when he found something strange in the programme that his large neighbour had given him．It was a thin piece of paper with some writing on it—not normal writing．It looked to me more like Runic letters in red and black．Well，we were looking at this and wondering how to give it back to its owner when the door opened and the wind blew the paper into the fire．It was burnt in a moment．'
　　Mr Dunning sat silent as Harrington paused．
　　'Now，'he continued，'I don't know if you ever read that book of Karswell's，The History of Witchcraft，which my brother said was so badly written．'
　　Dunning shook his head．
　　'Well，'Harrington went on，'after my brother died I read some of it．The book was indeed badly written and a lot of it was rubbish，but one bit caught my eye．It was about “Casting the Runes”on people in order to harm them，and I'm sure that Karswell was writing from personal experience．I won't tell you all the details，but I'm certain that the large man at the concert was Karswell，and that the paper he gave my brother caused his death．Now，I must ask you if anything similar has happened to you．'
　　Dunning told him what had happened in the British Museum．
　　'So Karswell did actually pass you some papers？'said Harrington．'Have you checked them？ No？Well，I think we should do so at once，if you agree．'
　　They went round to Dunning's empty house where his papers were lying on the table．As he picked them up，a thin piece of paper fell to the ground．A sudden wind blew it to- wards the open window，but Harrington closed the window just in time to stop the paper escaping．He caught the paper in his hand．
　　'I thought so，'he said．'It looks just like the one my brother was given．I think you're in great danger，Dunning．'
　　The two men discussed the problem for a long time．The paper was covered in Runic letters which they could not under- stand，but both men felt certain that the message，whatever it was，could bring unknown horrors to its owner．They agreed that the paper must be returned to Karswell，and that the only safe and sure way was to give it to him in person and see that he accepted it．This would be difficult since Karswell knew what Dunning looked like．
　　'I can grow a beard，'said Dunning，'so that he won't recognize me．But who knows when the end will come？'
　　'I think I know，'said Harrington．'The concert where my brother was given the paper was on June 18th，and he died on September 18th，three months later．'
　　'Perhaps it will be the same for me，'Dunning said miserably．He looked in his diary．'Yes，April 23rd was the day in the Museum—that brings me to July 23rd．Now，Harrington， I would very much like to know anything you can tell me about your brother's trouble．'
　　'The thing that worried him most，'said Harrington，'was the feeling that whenever he was alone，someone was watching him．After a time I began to sleep in his room，and he felt better because of that． But he talked a lot in his sleep．'
　　'What about？'asked Dunning．
　　'I think it would be better not to go into details about that，'replied Harrington But I remember that he received a packet by post，which contained a little diary．My brother didn't look at it，but after his death I did，and found that all the pages after September 18th had been cut out．Perhaps you wonder why he went out alone on the evening he died？The strange thing is that during the last week of his life all his worries seemed to disappear，and he no longer felt that someone was watching or following him．'
　　Finally，the two men made a plan．Harrington had a friend who lived near Lufford Abbey；he would stay with him and watch Karswell．If he thought they had a chance to arrange an accidental meeting，he would send a telegram to Dunning． Meanwhile，Dunning had to be ready to move at any moment and had to keep the paper safe．
　　Harrington went off to his friend in Warwickshire and Dunning was left alone．He found waiting very hard，and was unable to work or to take any interest in anything．He felt that he was living in a black cloud that cut him off from the world． He became more and more worried as May，June，and the first half of July passed with no word from Harrington．But all this time Karswell remained at Lufford Abbey．
　　At last，less than a week before July 23rd，Dunning received a telegram from his friend：
　　Karswell is leaving London for France on the boat train on Thursday night．Be ready．I will come to you tonight．Harrington．
　　When he arrived，the two men made their final plan．The boat train from London stopped only once before Dover，at Croydon West．Harrington would get on the train in London and find where Karswell was sitting．Dunning would wait for the train at Croydon West where Harrington would look out for him．Dunning would make sure that his name was not on his luggage and，most importantly，must have the paper with him．
　　On Thursday night Dunning waited impatiently for the train at Croydon West．He now had a thick beard and was wearing glasses，and felt sure that Karswell would not recognize him． He noticed that he no longer felt himself to be in danger，but this only made him worry more，because he remembered what Harrington had said about his brother's last week．
　　At last the boat train arrived and he saw his friend at one of the windows．It was important not to show that they knew each other，so Dunning got on further down the train and slowly made his way to the right compartment．
　　Harrington and Karswell were alone in the compartment， and Dunning entered and sat in the corner furthest from Karswell．Karswell's heavy travelling coat and bag were on the seat opposite him，and next to where Dunning was now sitting．Dunning thought of hiding the paper in the coat but realized that this would not do；he would have to give it to Karswell and see that Karswell accepted it．Could he hide Karswell's bag in some way，put the paper in it，and then give the bag to him as he got off the train？This was the only plan he could think of．He wished desperately that he could ask Harrington's advice．
　　Karswell himself seemed very restless．Twice he stood up to look out of the window．Dunning was just going to try to make his bag fall off the seat when he saw a warning expression in Harrington's eye—Karswell was watching them in the window．
　　Then Karswell stood up a third time，opened the window and put his head outside．As he stood up，something fell silently to the floor and Dunning saw that it was a thin wallet containing Karswell's tickets．In a moment Dunning had pushed the paper into the pocket at the back of the wallet．Just then the train began to lose speed as it came into Dover station，and Karswell closed the window and turned round．
　　'May I give you this，sir？I think it must be yours，'said Dunning，holding out the wallet．
　　'Oh，thank you，sir，'replied Karswell，checking that they were his tickets．Then he put the wallet into his pocket．
　　Suddenly the compartment seemed to grow dark and very hot，but already Harrington and Dunning were opening the door and getting off the train．
　　Dunning，unable to stand up，sat on a seat on the platform breathing deeply，while Harrington followed Karswell the little way to the boat．He saw Karswell show his ticket to the ticket collector and pass on to the boat．As he did so，the official called after him：
　　'Excuse me，sir．Has your friend got a ticket？'
　　'What d'you mean，my friend？'shouted Karswell angrily．
　　'Sorry，sir，I thought there was someone with you，'apolo gized the ticket collector．He turned to another official beside him，'Did he have a dog with him or something？I was sure there were two of them．'
　　Five minutes later there was nothing except the disappearing lights of the boat，the night wind，and the moon．
　　That night the two friends sat up late in their room in the hotel．Although the danger was past，a worry remained．
　　'Harrington，'Dunning said，'I'm afraid we have sent a man to his death．'
　　'He murdered my brother，'replied Harrington，'and he tried to murder you．It is right that he should die．'
　　'Don't you think we should warn him？'asked Dunning．
　　'How can we？'replied his friend．'We don't know where he's going．'
　　'He's going to Abbeville，'said Dunning．'I saw it on his ticket．Today is the 21st．We could send a telegram in the morning to all the main hotels in Abbeville saying：Check your ticket wallet．Dunning．Then he would have a whole day．'
　　After a pause Harrington agreed．'I see it would make you feel happier，'he said，'so we'll warn him．'
　　The telegrams were sent first thing in the morning but no one knows if Karswell received any of them．All that is known is that on July 23rd a man was looking at the front of a church in Abbeville when a large piece of stone fell from the roof and hit him on the head，killing him immediately．The police re- ported that nobody was on the roof at the time．From papers found on the body they discovered that the dead man was an Englishman，named Karswell．
　　Some months later Dunning reminded Harrington that he had never told him what his brother had talked about in his sleep．But Harrington had only said a few words when Dun- ning begged him to stop．






■ The Experiment
　　In the last days of December，Dr Hall，the village priest， was working in his study when his servant entered the room，in great alarm．
　　'Oh，Dr Hall，sir，'she cried．'What do you think？The poor Squire's dead！'
　　'What？Squire Bowles？What are you saying，woman？'replied the priest．'I saw him only yesterday—'
　　'Yes，sir，I know，'said the servant，'but it's true．Mr Wickem，the clerk，has just brought the news on his way to ring the church bell． You'll hear it yourself in a moment．Listen！There it is．'And sure enough，the bell then began to ring，long and slow，telling the people of the village that someone had died．
　　Dr Hall stood up．'This is terrible，'he said．'I must go up to the Hall at once．The Squire was so much better yesterday． It seems so sudden．'
　　'Yes，sir，'agreed the servant．'Mr Wickem said that the poor Squire was taken ill very suddenly with a terrible pain． He died very quickly，and Wickem said they want him buried quickly too．'
　　'Yes，yes；well，I must ask Mrs Bowles herself of Mr Joseph，'said the priest．'Bring me my coat and hat，please． Oh，and tell Mr Wickem that I would like to see him when he has finished ringing the bell．'And he hurried off to the Hall．
　　When he returned an hour later，he found the clerk waiting for him．
　　'There's a lot of work for you to do，Wickem，'he said， and not much time to do it．'
　　'Yes，sir，'said Wickem．'You'll want the family tomb opened，of course…'
　　'No，no，not at all，'replied Dr Hall．'The poor Squire said before he died that he did not want to be buried in the family tomb．It is to be an earth grave in the churchyard．'
　　'Excuse me，sir，'said Wickem，very surprised．'Do I understand you right？No tomb，you say，and just an earth grave？The poor Squire was too ill to know what he was saying，surely？'
　　'Yes，Wickem，it seems strange to me too，'said the priest． 'But Mr Joseph tells me that his father，or I should say his stepfather，made his wishes very clear when he was in good health． Clean earth and open air．You know，of course，the Squire had some strange ideas，though he never told me of this one．And there's another thing，Wickem．No coffin．'
　　'Oh dear，oh dear！'said Wickem．'There'll be some talk about that．And I know that old Mr Wright has some lovely wood for the Squire's coffin—he's kept it for him for years．'ei
　　'Well，'said Dr Hall，'those are the Squire's wishes，so I'm told，so that's what we must do．You must get the grave dug and everything ready by ten o'clock tomorrow night．Tell Wright that we shall need some lights．'
　　'Very well，sir．If those are the orders，I must do my best，'said Wickem．'Shall I send the women from the village to prepare the body？'
　　'No，Wickem．That was not mentioned，'said the priest． 'No doubt Mr Joseph will send for them if he wants them． You have enough work to do without that．Good night，Wick- em．'He paused．'I was just writing out the year's burials in the church records．I didn't think that I'd have to add Squire Bowles'name to them．'
　　The Squire's burial took place as planned．All the villagers and a few neighbours were present，and the Squire's stepson Joseph walked behind the body as it was carried to the church- yard．In those days nobody expected the Squire's wife to come to the burial．The Squire had no family except his wife and stepson，and he had left everything to his wife．
　　But what was everything？The land，house，furniture，pictures，and sliver were all there，but no money was found． This was very strange．Squire Bowles was quite a rich man；he received plenty of money from his land every year，his lawyers were honest，but still there was no money．The Squire had not been mean with his money．His wife had all she needed，he sent Joseph to school and university，and he lived well．But still he earned more money than he spent．Where was it？
　　Mrs Bowles and her son searched the house and grounds several times but found no money．They could not understand it． They sat one evening in the library discussing the problem for the twentieth time．
　　'You've been through his papers again，Joseph，have you？' asked the mother．
　　'Yes，Mother，and I've found nothing．'
　　'What was he writing the day before he died，do you know？ And why was he always writing to Mr Fowler in Gloucester？'
　　'You know he had some strange ideas about what happens to a person's soul when he dies．He was writing to Mr Fowler about it but he didn't finish the letter．Here，I'll read it to you．
　　He fetched some papers from the Squire's writing table and began to read．
　　My dear friend，
　　You will be interested to hear about my latest studies， though I am not sure how accurate they are．One writer says that for a time after death a man's soul stays close to the places he knew during life—so close，in fact，that he can be called to speak to the living．Indeed，he must come，if he is called with the right words．And these words are given in an experiment in Dr Moore's book，which I have copied out for you．But when the soul has come，and has opened its mouth to speak，the caller may see and hear more than he wishes， which is usually to know where the dead man has hidden his money．
　　Joseph stopped reading and there was silence for a moment．
　　Then his mother said，'There was no more than that？'
　　'No，Mother，nothing．'
　　'And have you met this Mr Fowler？'
　　'Yes．He came to speak once or twice at Oxford．'
　　'Well，'said the mother，as he was a friend of the Squire， I think you should write to him and tell him what…what has happened．You will know what to say．And the letter is for him，after all．'
　　'You're right，Mother，'replied Joseph．'I'll write to him at once．'And he wrote that same evening．
　　In time a letter came back from Gloucester and with it a large packet；and there were more evening talks in the library at the Hall．At the end of one evening，the mother said：
　　'Well，if you are sure，do it tonight．Go round by the fields where no one will see you．Oh，and here's a cloth you can use．'
　　'What cloth is it，Mother？'asked Joseph．
　　'Just a cloth，'was the answer．
　　Joseph went out by the garden door，and his mother stood in the doorway，thinking，with her hand over her mouth． Then she said quietly，'It was the cloth to cover his face．Oh， I wish I had not been so hurried！'
　　The night was very dark and a strong wind blew loud over the black fields；loud enough to drown all sounds of calling or answering—if anyone did call or answer．
　　Next morning Joseph's mother hurried to his bedroom．
　　'Give me the cloth，'she said．'The servants must not find it． And tell me，tell me，quick！'
　　Her son，sitting on the edge of the bed with his head in his hands，looked up at her with wild，red eyes．
　　'We have opened his mouth，'he said．'Why，oh why， Mother，did you leave his face uncovered？'
　　'You know how hurried I was that day，'she replied．'I had no time．But do you mean that you have seen it？'
　　Joseph hid his face in his hands．'Yes，Mother，and he said you would see it，too，'
　　His mother gave an awful cry and caught hold of the bedpost．
　　'He's angry，'Joseph went on．'He was waiting for me to call him，I'm sure．I had only just finished saying the words when I heard him—like a dog growling under the earth．'
　　He jumped to his feet and walked up and down the room．
　　'And now he's free！What can we do？I cannot meet him again．I cannot take the drink he drank and go where he is！And I'm afraid to lie here another night！Oh，why did you do it，Mother？We had enough as it was．'
　　'Be quiet！'said his mother through dry lips．'It was you as much as I．But why spend time talking？Listen to me．It's only six o'clock Yarmouth's not far，and we've enough money to cross the sea—things like him can't follow us over water．We'll take the night boat to Holland．You see to the horses while I pack our bags．'
　　Joseph stared at her．'What will people say here？'
　　'You must tell the priest that we've learnt of some of the Squire's money in Amsterdam and we must go to collect it． Go，go！Or if you're not brave enough to do that，lie here and wait for him again tonight．'
　　Joseph trembled and left the room．
　　That evening after dark a boatman entered an inn at Yarmouth，where a man and a woman were waiting，with their bags on the floor beside them．
　　'Are you ready，sir and madam？'he asked．'We sail in less than an hour．My other passenger is waiting by the boat．Is this all your luggage？'He picked up the bags．
　　'Yes，We are travelling light，'said Joseph．'Did you say you have other passengers for Holland？'
　　'Just one，'replied the boatman，'and he seems to travel even lighter than you．'
　　'Do you know him？'asked Mrs Bowles．She put her hand on her son's arm，and they both paused in the doorway．
　　'No，'said the boatman．'He keeps his face hidden，but I'd know him again by his voice—he's got a strange way of speaking，like a dog growling．But you'll find that he knows you．“Go and fetch them out，”he said to me，“and I'll wait for them here．”And sure enough，he's coming this way now．'
　　In those days women who poisoned their husbands were burnt to death．The records for a certain year at Norwich tell of a woman who was punished in this way，and whose son was hanged afterwards．No one had accused them of their crime， but they told the priest of their village what they had done． The name of the village must remain secret，because people say there is money still hidden there．
　　Dr Moore's book of experiments is now in the University Library at Cambridge，and on page 144 this is written：
　　This experiment has often proved true—to find out gold hid- den in the ground，robbery，murder，or any other thing．Go to the grave of a dead man，call his name three times，and say：'I call on you to leave the darkness and to come to me this night and tell me truly where the gold lies hidden．'Then take some earth from the dead man's grave and tie it in a clean cloth and sleep with it under your right ear．And wherever you lie or sleep，that night he will come and tell you truly，waking or sleeping．






■ 'Oh，Whistle，and I'll Come to You，My Boy'
　　'Are you going away for the holidays，Professor？' The speaker was sitting next to the Professor at dinner in St James's college．
　　'Yes，I'm leaving tomorrow，'said Professor Parkins． 'I'm learning to play golf，and I'm going to Burnstow on the east coast for a week or two to improve my game．'
　　Professor Parkins was a young man who took himself，and everything that he did，very seriously．
　　'Oh，Parkins，'said another man．'There are the remains of an old Templar church at Burnstow．Would you have a look at the place？I'd like to know if its worth going to see．'
　　'Certainly，'said the Professor．'I'll make some notes for you if you like．'
　　'There won't be much left above ground．I think the place is quite near the beach，about half a mile north from the Globe Inn．'
　　'I'm staying at the Globe，in fact，'said Parkins．He sounded a little annoyed．'I could only get a room with two beds in it．I plan to do some work there，and I need a large room with a table，but I really don't like the idea of having two beds in the room．'
　　'Two beds？How terrible for you，Parkins！'said a man called Rogers．'I'll come down and use one of them for a few days．I'll be a companion for you．'
　　Parkins gave a polite little laugh．'I'm afraid you'd find it rather dull，Rogers．You don't play golf，do you？'
　　'No．Very boring game，'said Rogers，not at all politely．'But if you don't want me to come，just say so． The truth， as you always tell us， never hurts．'
　　Professor Parkins was well known for always being polite and always telling the truth， and Rogers often amused himself by asking questions which Parkins found difficult to answer． Parkins tried to find an answer now that was both polite and truthful．
　　'Well，Rogers，perhaps it will be a little difficult for me to work if you are there． '
　　Rogers laughed loudly．'Well done，Parkins！'he said． 'Don't worry．I'll let you get on with your work in peace， and I can be useful and keep the ghosts away．'Here he smiled at the others round the table， while Parkins'face turned a deep pink．'Oh，I'm sorry，Parkins，'Rogers added．'I for- got that you don't like careless talk about ghosts．'
　　'That is quite true，'said Parkins．His voice got a little louder．'I cannot accept the idea of ghosts．It is the complete opposite of everything I believe．I hold，as you know， very strong opinons on this matter．'
　　'Oh yes，we know that，'said Rogers．'Well，we'll talk about it again at Burnstow perhaps．'
　　From this conversation it will be clear that Parkins was in－ deed a very serious young man—quite unable，sadly，to see the funny side of anything，but at the same time very brave and sincere in his opinions．
　　Late the following day Parkins arrived at the Globe Inn in Burnstow，and was taken to his room with the two beds， of which we have heard．He unpacked his things and arranged his books and papers very tidily on the large table by the window．In fact， the table was surrounded on three sides by windows：the large central window looked straight out to sea， the right one looked south over the village of Burnstow， and the left one looked north along the beach and the low cliff behind it．Between the inn and the sea，there was only a piece of rough grass and then the beach．Over the years the sea had slowly come closer；now it was no more than fifty metres away．
　　Most of the people staying at the Globe were there for the golf．One of tnem was a Colonel Wilson，an old soldier with a very loud voice，and very strong opinions．
　　Professor Parkins， who was as brave as he was honest， spent the first day of his holiday playing golf with Colonel Wilson，and trying to'improve his game．'Perhaps he was not wholly successful in this，because by the end of the afternoon the Colonel's face was a most alarming colour． Even his moustache looked angry，and Parkins decided that it would be safer not to walk back to the inn with him．He thought he would walk along the beach instead， and try to find the remains of the Templar church．
　　He found them very easily—by falling over some of the old stones，in fact． When he picked himself up， he saw that the ground all around him was broken up with shallow holes and bits of old stone wall covered in grass．The Templars used to build round churches， Parkins remembered， and even after hundreds of years there were enough grass-covered stones left to show the circle of the outer wall． For a time Parkins walked around，looking and measuring，and making notes in his note- book．
　　There was a large stone in the centre of the circle， and Parkins noticed that the grass had been pulled away from one corner of it．He knelt down and，using his pocket-knife， dug away some more of the grass to see the stone underneath． As he did so，a piece of earth fell inwards，showing that there was a hole under the stone．He tried to light a match to see inside， but the wind was too strong， so he put his hand into the hole and felt around with his knife．The sides，top，and bottom of the hole were smooth and regular，he discovered；it must be a man-made hole in a wall．As he pulled the knife out， he heard the sound of metal on metal—there was something in the hole． He put his hand back in and his fingers found a thin piece of metal．Naturally enough， he pulled it out，and saw that it was a piece of metal pipe about ten centimetres long，also man- made and clearly very old．By this time it was getting too dark to do anything more， so he put the metal pipe in his pocket and started to walk home along the beach．
　　In the evening half－light the place seemed wild and lonely， and a cold north wind blew at his back． Far ahead of him he could see the lights of the village， but here there was only the long empty beach with its black wooden breakwaters， and the shadowy， whispering sea．
　　He crossed the stones higher up on the beach and went down to the sand， which was easier to walk on， although he had to climb over the breakwaters every few metres．
　　When he looked behind him to see how far he had come， he saw that he might have a companion on his walk home． A dark figure， some way back， seemed to be running to catch up with him，but he never seemed to get any closer．It couldn't be anybody he knew， Parkins thought，so he did not wait for him． However，a companion， he began to think， would really be very welcome on that cold， dark beach．He suddenly remembered the stories he had read in his less sensible childhood—stories of strange companions met in lonely places． 'What would I do now，'he wondered，'if I looked back and saw a black figure with wings and a tail？ Would I run， or would I stand and fight？Fortunately，the person behind me doesn't look like that—and he seems to be as far away as when I first saw him．I shall get my dinner before he does， and， oh dear！It's nearly time for dinner now．I must run！'
　　At dinner the Professor found the Colonel much calmer than he had been in the afternoon．Later，the two men played cards together and， as Parkins played cards much better than he played golf，the Colonel became quite friendly and they arranged to play golf together again the next day．
　　When Parkins returned to his room， he found the little met- al pipe where he had put it on the table．He looked at it carefully and realized that it was a whistle．He tried to blow it but it was full of earth，so he took out his knife and cleared the earth out onto a piece of paper，which he then shook out of the window As he stood at the open window， he was surprised to see someone standing on the grass in front of the hotel， although it was almost midnight．
　　He shut the window and took the whistle over to the light to look at it again He cleaned the dirt off and found that there were letters deeply cut along the side of the whistle．
　　QUIS EST ISTE QUI VENIT
　　'Now，that's Latin，'he said to himself．'I think it means， “Who is this who is coming？”Well， the best way to find out is clearly to whistle for him．'
　　He put the whistle to his lips and blew，then stopped suddenly，surprised and pleased at the sound he had made．It was a soft sound， but also seemed to travel a long way．And it brought a picture into his mind—a picture of a wide，dark place at night， with a fresh wind blowing， and in the middle a lonely figure…But at that moment a real wind made his window shake，and the picture disappeared．The wind was so sudden that it made him look up，just in time to see the white shape of a seabird's wing outside the window．
　　He was so interested in the sound the whistle had made that he blew it again，this time more loudly．No picture came into his mind，but a sudden and very violent wind blew his window open with a crash．Both candles went out，and the wind seemed to be trying to pull the room to pieces．For twenty seconds Parkins battled to close the window again，but it was like trying to push back a burglar who was fighting to get in． Then the wind suddenly dropped for a moment，and the window banged shut and fastened itself．Parkins lit the candles and lookea to see what damage had been done．There was none— not even a broken window．But the noise had woken the Colonel in the room above；Parkins could hear him walking around and talking to himself．
　　The wind continued to blow for a long time，beating against the house and crying like a creature in pain．Lying in bed，listening，Parkins thought that a less sensible person might imagine all kinds of unpleasant things．In fact，after a quarter of an hour，he thought that even sensible people would prefer not to hear this sound．
　　He noticed that one of his neighbours was finding it difficult to sleep，too．He could quite clearly hear someone not far away，turning over in bed again and again．
　　Sometimes when we close our eyes and try to sleep， we see pictures that are so unpleasant that we have to open our eyes again to make them disappear． This is what now happened to the Professor．Every time he closed his eyes he saw the same picture．There was a long beach with breakwaters running down to the sea，under a dark sky He recognized it as the beach he had walked along earlier Then，in the distance， he saw a man running along the beach，climbing desperately over the breakwaters and looking back over his shoulder all the time． Parkins could not see his face， but he knew that the man was terribly afraid． He was also nearly exhausted Each breakwater was harder to climb than the last．'Will he get over this next one？'thought Parkins．'It seems higher than the others．'Yes； half climbing， half throwing himself， the man got over，and then fell to the ground， unable to get up again．
　　The picture had not yet shown any cause for the man's fear， but now a distant figure appeared，moving very quickly．It wore a long， flowing garment， and there was something so strange about the way it moved that Parkins was very unwilling to see it any closer．It stopped，lifted its arms， bent down towards the sand，then ran，still bent over，down to the edge of the sea and back again．Now it straightened itself，and moved forward along the beach at a frightening speed．At last it came to the breakwater where the man lay hidden． Again it ran down to the sea and back again， then lifted its arms and ran towards the breakwater．
　　It was always at this moment that Parkins was not brave enough to keep his eyes closed any longer．At last he decided to light his candle，get out a book， and read for a while．The noise of the match and the sudden light seemed to alarm some－ thing near his bed—a rat， probably—which ran away across the floor． The match immediately went out， but a second one burnt better，and Parkins lit the candle and opened his book． When he finally felt sleepy， he forgot， for the first time in his tidy， sensible life， to blow out the candle， and the next morning it was completely burnt down．
　　He was in his room after breakfast when the servant who cleaned the rooms came in，carrying some blankets．
　　'Would you like any extra blankets on your bed，sir？' she asked．
　　'Ah， yes，thank you，'said Parkins．'I would like one．I think it's getting colder．'
　　'Which bed shall I put it on，sir？' the girl asked．
　　'What？ Why， the one I slept in last night，' replied Parkins．
　　'Yes，sir． But we thought you'd slept in both of them， sir．We had to make both of them this morning．'
　　'Really？How strange！'said Parkins．'I didn't touch the other bed except to put my suitcase on it when I unpacked． But you thought that someone had actually slept in it？'
　　'Oh yes，sir．The sheets and blankets were thrown all over the place．I thought you'd had bad dreams， sir．'
　　'Oh dear，' said Parkins．'Well，I'm sorry if I made extra work for you．Oh， I'm expecting a friend of mine from Cam- bridge to come for a few days and sleep in the other bed．That will be all right，I suppose？
　　'Oh yes，sir，'said the girl．'It's no trouble， I'm sure． Thank you， sir．'And she left the room .
　　That day Parkins tried very hard to improve his game，with some success， and the Colonel became even more friendly， and quite talkative．
　　'That was an extraordinary wind we had last night， he said as they were playing．'In my part of the country they would say that someone had been whistling for it．'
　　'Do they really believe in that kind of thing where you come from？'asked Parkins．
　　'They believe in it all over the place，'the Colonel replied． 'And，in my experience，there's usually some truth in what the country people say．'
　　There was a pause in the conversation while they continued with the game Then Parkins said，'I feel I should tell you， Colonel，that I hold very strong opinions on these matters．In fact，I don't believe at all in anything supernatural．'
　　'What？' cried the Colonel，'D'you mean to say that you don't believe in ghosts，or anything of that kind？'
　　'In nothing whatever of that kind，'replied Parkins． 'There is an explanation for everything， you see．In fact，'he went on，'I blew a whistle myself last night，and the wind seemed to come in answer to my call．But of course—'
　　The Colonel stopped and looked at him．'Whistling， were you？' he said．'What kind of whistle did you use？ Your turn to play，sir．'
　　Parkins hit his ball，and then told the Colonel about finding the old whistle in the Templar church．
　　'Well，sir，I'd be very careful about using a thing like that，'said the Colonel．'Who knows what the Templars used it for？ Dangerous lot of people，they were．'
　　He went on to give his opinions on the church，old and modern，and the two men had a very enjoyable argument． The morning passed so pleasantly that they continued to play golf together in the afternoon，then walked back in the evening light to the Globe．
　　As they turned the corner of the inn，the Colonel was nearly knocked down by a small boy who ran into him at high speed， and then remained holding on to him and crying．At first the Colonel was rather annoyed，but he soon saw that the boy was so frightened that he could not speak．
　　'What's the matter？What have you seen？Who has frightened you？ the two men asked together．
　　'Oh sir！I saw it wave at me out of the window， 'cried the boy，'and I don't like it．'
　　'What window？' said the Colonel crossly．'Explain your－ self，boy．'
　　'The front window in the inn，sir，upstairs．'
　　After several questions they learnt that the boy had been playing with his friends on the grass in front of the inn． When the others had gone home for their tea，he had looked up at the big front window and had seen something waving at him． It was a figure of some kind，in white．The boy couldn't see its face，but it had waved at him．There was something horrible about it，and it wasn't like a human being at all．
　　'It was someone trying to frighten you，'said the Colonel． 'Next time， like a brave little English boy， you throw a stone at it…Well，perhaps not that；but tell the people in the inn about it． Now，here's sixpence for you，and you'd better run along home for your tea．'
　　The two men went round to the front of the inn and looked up．There was only one window that fitted the description they had heard．
　　'That's very strange，'said Parkins．'I remember that I locked my door when I went out this morning and the key is still in my pocket．'
　　They went upstairs，found that the door of the room was still locked，unlocked it，and went in．
　　'Well，everything seems perfectly all right，'said Parkins， looking around．
　　'Except your bed，'said the Colonel．
　　'That's not my bed，'said Parkins．'But it certainly looks very untidy．The sheets and blankets were thrown about all over the bed．Parkins thought for a while．'Ah，'he said，'I disarranged it when I was unpacking．Perhaps the girl came in to make the bed，the boy saw her at the window，and then she was called away before she could finish it．'
　　'Well，ring the bell and ask her，'said the Colonel．
　　When the girl came，she explained that she had made the bed in the morning and that no one had been in the room since the Professor had left．Mr Simpson，the manager，had the only other key．Mr Simpson then came up and said that he had not been in the room himself，and had not given the key to anyone else．Parkins checked the room carefully；nothing was missing and his books and papers were as he had left them． The girl made the bed again and the two men went down to have their tea．
　　That evening， Colonel Wilson was unusually quiet and thoughtful during dinner and cards and，as they were going up to their rooms， he said to Parkins：
　　'You know where I am if you need me during the night．'
　　'Thank you，Colonel，but I don't expect to call on you，'replied Parkins．'Oh，I have that whistle I told you about． Would you like to see it？'
　　The Colonel turned the whistle over in his hands，looking at it carefully．
　　'What are you going to do with it？' he asked．
　　'I'll show it to the people at Cambridge when I get back and probably give it to the museum，if it's any good．'
　　'If it were mine，'said the Colonel，'I'd throw it into the sea right now．But，of course， you and I don't think the same way about these things．Good night．'
　　And he went off to his room．
　　There were no curtains at the windows in the Professor's room．The previous night it had not mattered， but tonight there was a bright moon in a cloudless sky．Parkins was afraid that the moonlight might wake him up in the middle of the night，so he arranged a blanket，held up with a stick and his umbrella，which would stop the moonlight shining on to his bed．Soon he was comfortably in bed where he read a book for a while．Then he blew out his candle and went to sleep．
　　An hour or so later he was suddenly woken by a loud crash． In a moment he realized that the blanket had fallen down and a bright moon was shining on his bed．Should he get up and put the blanket up again，or could he manage to sleep if he did not？He lay in bed for several minutes trying to decide what to do．
　　All at once he turned over in bed，eyes wide open，listening hard．There had been a movement in the other bed！Was it a rat？The sound came again，something moving in the blankets and making the bed shake．No rat could make a noise like that，surely！
　　Suddenly his heart nearly stopped beating as a figure sat up in the empty bed．Parkins jumped out of his own bed and ran towards the window to get his stick．As he did so，the thing in the other bed slid to the floor and stood， with arms stretched out，between Parkins and the door．
　　Parkins stared at the creature in horror．He could not reach the door without touching it as he passed，and the thought of that touch made him feel sick．
　　Now it began to move，bending low and feeling its way with arms that were hidden in its flowing garment．Parkins realized with horror that it could not see．It turned away from him and，in doing so，touched the bed he had just left． It bent its head low and felt all over the bed in a way that made Parkins tremble with fear．
　　Realizing that the bed was empty，the creature moved for－ ward into the moonlight which shone in through the window． For the first time Parkins saw it clearly， but the only thing he could remember later was a horrible， a sickeningly horrible， face of crumpled cloth．The expression on that face he could not or would not describe， but it certainly drove him nearly mad with fear．
　　But he had no time to watch it for long．With frightening speed the creature moved around the room，searching and feeling，and a corner of its flowing garment brushed across Parkins'face． He screamed in horror， and at once it jumped at him， driving him towards the window． The next moment Parkins was halfway through the window backwards，screaming again and again at the top of his voice， and the cloth face was pushed close into his own．
　　In that final second，the Colonel kicked the door open and was just in time to see the frightening sight at the window． When he reached the figures， only one was left．Parkins fell forward into the room in a faint，and before him on the floor lay a crumpled bedsheet．
　　The Colonel asked no questions，but kept everyone out of the room， helped Parkins back to bed and，with a blanket round his shoulders，spent the rest of the night in the other bed．
　　The next morning Mr Rogers arrived and，to his surprise，was very warmly welcomed by the Professor．The three men discussed what to do for a long time．The Colonel，who remembered a similar experience in India，supposed that the creature，having no body of its own，had to make one out of the sheet from the bed．At the end of their talk，the Colonel left the hotel carrying between his finger and thumb a small piece of metal，which he threw into the sea as far as a strong arm could send it．Later，he burnt the sheet in the field be－ hind the Globe．
　　As you can imagine，Professor Parkins'opinions on some matters are now less certain that they used to be．He is also a more nervous person than he was．Even a coat hanging up on a door will alarm him，and the sight of a scarecrow in a field late on a winter afternoon has given him more than one sleepless night．



　　QUIS EST ISTE QUI VENIT

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Three Men in a Boat by Jerome K.Jerome





■ Chapter 1 We decide to go on holiday
　　There were four of us-George，and William Samuel Harris，and myself，and Montmorency．We were sit-ting in my room，and we were smoking and talking about how bad we were-ill，I mean，of course．
　　We were all feeling in poor health，and we were getting quite worried about it．Harris said that he felt really bad sometimes，and he did not know what he was doing．And then George said that he felt bad，too，and that he did not know what he was do-ing either．With me it was my heart．I knew it was my heart because I had read something in a magazine about the symp-toms of a bad heart．I had all of them．
　　It is a most extraordinary thing，but every time I read about an illness，I realize that I have it too-and that my symptoms are very bad！In fact，my health has always been a worry，I remember…
　　One day I had a little health problem，and I went to the British Museum Library to read about it．I took the book off the library shelf，and I began to read．After some time，I turned over the page and I began to read about another illness．I don't remember the name of the illness，but I know it was something really terrible．I read about half a page-and then I knew that I had that disease too．
　　I sat there for a time，cold with horror．Slowly，I beqan to turn over more pages．I came to a disease which was worse than the last one．I began to read about it and，as I expected，I had that disease too．Then I began to get really interested in myself，so went back to the beginning of the book．I started with the letter'a'and I read from 'a'to'z'．Ｉ found that there was only one disease which I did not have．This made me a little unhappy．Why didn't I have that disease too？
　　When I walked into that reading-room，I was a happy，healthy young man．When I left I was a very sick man，close to death…
　　But I was talking about my heart-nobody understood how ill I really was．I had this bad heart when I was a boy．It was with me all the time．I knew that it was my heart because I had all the symptoms of a bad heart．The main symptom was that I did not want to work．Of course，nobody understood that the problem was my heart．Doctors were not so clever then．They just thought that I was lazy！
　　'Why，you lazy boy，you，'they used to say．'Get up and do some work for once in your life！'they did not understand that I was ill．
　　And they did not give me medicine for this illness-they hit me on the side of the head．It is very strange，but those blows on my head often made the illness go away for a time．Sometimes just one blow made the sickness disappear and made me want to start work immediately…
　　Anyway，that evening，George and William Harris and I sat there for half an hour，and described our illnesses to each other．I explained to George and William Harris how I felt when I got up in the morning．William Harris told us how he felt when he went to bed．Then George stood in front of the fire，and，with great feeling，he showed us how he felt in the night．
　　George always thinks he is ill，but really，there is never any-thing the matter with him，you know．
　　At that monent Mrs Poppets，my housekeeper，knocked on the door．She wanted to know if we were ready to have supper．
　　We smiled sadly at each other，and then we said that perhaps we should try to eat something．Harris said that a little food helped to prevent illness．So Mrs Poppets brought the supper in．We sat down at the table，and for half an hour we managed to play with some steak and chips-and with a large cake that Mrs Poppets had made．
　　When we had made ourselves eat something，we filled our glasses，and we lit our pipes．Then we began to talk about our health again．We were not quite sure what was the matter with us．However，we were all quite certain of one thing-we had been doing too much work．
　　'We need a rest，'Harris said．
　　'A rest and a change，'George added．
　　I agreed with George，and I said that perhaps we could go to the country．We could find a nice，quiet place and we could sit in the warm summer sun．We could go somewhere peaceful，far away from other people．
　　Harris said that he thought that would be awful．He added that he had been to a place like that once．Everyone went to bed at eight o'clock，and he had to walk for an hour to buy cigarettes and a newspaper．
　　'No，'Harris said．'If you want a rest and a change，then the sea is best．'
　　I said that this was a terrible idea．A sea trip is fine if you are going for a month or two-but not for a week．I know what it is like…
　　You start out on Monday and you think that you are going to enjoy yourself．You wave goodbye happily to your friends．You walk up and down on the ship，like Captain Cook，Sir Francis Drake or Christopher Columbus．On Tuesday you wish that you had not come．On Wednesday，Thursday and Friday you wish that you were dead．On Saturday you are able to drink something．You begin to smile a little at the kind people who ask you how you are．On Sunday you start to walk again，and you eat a little．And on Monday morning，as you stand and wait to get off the ship-you begin to enjoy yourself．
　　I remember that a friend of mine once took a short sea trip from London to Liverpool for his health．He bought a return ticket，but，when he got to Liverpool，he sold it and he came back by train…
　　So I was against the sea trip-not for myself，you understand．I am never seasick．But I was afraid for George．George said he would be fine．In fact，he said he would quite like it，but he thought that Harris and I would both be ill．Harris said he was never seasick．In fact，he had often tried to be ill，but he had not succeeded．It is very strange，but，when you are on land，you never meet anybody who has ever been seasick！
　　So George said，'Well，let's go up the river，then．'He added，'We'll have fresh air on the river．The hard work on the boat will make us hungry，so we'll enjoy our food．We'll sleep well，too．'
　　Harris replied，'Well，you never have any trouble sleeping，anyway．In fact，you're always going to sleep！'
　　But，in the end，Harris agreed that it was a good idea．I thought that it was a good idea，too．The only one who did not like the idea was Montmorency．
　　'It's different for me，'his face said．'You like it，but I don't！There's nothing for me to do．I don't smoke．I don't like looking at the trees and the flowers，and when I'm asleep you'll play about with the boat and I'll fall over the side！'
　　Montmorency's idea of a good time is to collect together all the most awful dogs he can find and then go round the town，looking for other awful dogs to fight．
　　But we were three to one，so we decided to go anyway．






■ Chapter 2 We start to make plans
　　We pulled out the maps and we discussed plans．
　　We decided to start on the following Saturday．Har-ris and I would go down to Kingston in the morning and take the boat up to Chertsey，but George could not leave the City until the afternoon．（George goes to sleep at a bank from ten o'clock until four o'clock from Monday to Friday．On Satur-day they wake him up and put him out onto the street at two o'clock．）So George was going to meet us at Chertsey．
　　The next question was where to sleep at night．
　　George and I did not want to sleep in hotels at night．We wanted to sleep outside．'How beautiful，'we said，'in the country，by the river，with the birds，the flowers and the trees all around us！'
　　I can imagine it easily…
　　At the end of the day，night comes and the world is peaceful and calm．Our little boat moves silently into some quiet little corner on the river．There we put up our tent，and we cook and eat our simple supper．Then we fill our pipes and we sit and talk quietly．Sometimes we stop for a moment or two and we listen to the water as it plays gently against the boat．The silver moon shines down on us and our heads are full of beautiful thoughts．We sit in silence for a time．We do not want to speak．Then we laugh quietly，put away our pipes，say'Goodnight'and go to bed．The peaceful sound of the water against the boat sends us to sleep-and we dream．We dream that the world is young again…
　　'And what about when it rains？'Harris said．
　　He was right．When it rains，you do not enjoy living in tents．
　　I thought about it again…
　　It is evening．You are very wet．There is a lot of water in the boat and everything in it is wet，too．You find a place on the river bank which is not as wet as other places．You get out of the boat，pull out the tent，and two of you try to put it up．Because it is wet，it is very heavy．And then it falls on top of you．You cannot get it off your head，and you get angry．All the time it is raining heavily．It is difficult to put up a tent in good weather．In wet weather it is almost impossible．The other man does not help you．He starts to play about．You get your side of the tent up and begin to tie the ropes to the ground．Just then he pulls the tent from his side，and he destroys all your hard work．
　　'Here！What do you think you're doing？'you call out．
　　'What are you doing，you mean，'he answers angrily．
　　'Don't pull it！You've got it all wrong，you stupid man！'you cry．
　　'No，I haven't！'he shouts．'Let your side go！'
　　'I tell you，you're wrong！'you scream，and you wish you could get to him to hit him．You pull your side of the tent hard-and pull out all the ropes on his side．
　　'Ah！The stupid fool！'you hear him say to himself．And then，suddenly，he gives a violent pull-and your side comes out，too．Slowly，you start to go round to his side to tell him what you think of him．At the same time，he begins to come round the other way，to tell you what he feels．And you follow each other round and round，and you shout at each other-until the tent falls down．And there you are！You stand and look at each other across the tent．At the same time，you both call out，'There you are！What did I tell you？'
　　Meanwhile，the third man has been trying to get the water out of the boat．The water has run up his arms，and he is wet and angry．Suddenly，he wants to know what you are doing，and why the tent is not up yet．
　　When，at last，the tent is up，you carry the things out of the boat．Supper is mostly rainwater-rainwater bread，rainwater soup．Happily，you have something strong to drink．This brings back your interest in life until it is time to go to bed．
　　There you dream that a very large animal has suddenly sat down on you．You wake up and you understand that something terrible has happened．At first，you think that the world has ended．Then you think that this cannot be true．So it must be thieves，or murderers，or fire．No help comes，and all you know is that thousands of people are kicking you，and you cannot breathe．
　　Somebody else is in trouble，too．You can hear his cries．They are coming from under your bed．
　　You decide to fight，and you hit out，left and right，with your arms and your legs．You are shouting all the time．At last you find your head in the fresh air．Near you，you see a half-dressed murderer．He is waiting to kill you．You are just going to start fighting him when you see that is Jim．
　　At the same moment，he sees that it is you．
　　'Oh，it's you，is it？'he says．
　　'Yes，'you answer．'What's happened？'
　　'The tent has blown down，I think，'he says．'Where's Bill？'
　　Then you both shout for Bill．The ground underneath you moves，and a voice says，'Get off my head！'
　　The next day you have no voices because you have all caught colds，and all day you argue with each other in angry whispers…
　　We therefore decided that we would sleep out in tents on fine nights，and in hotels when it rained．
　　Montmorency was very pleased about this．He does not like peace and quiet．He prefers noise．But he looks so good，so well-behaved．When old ladies and gentlemen look at him，tears come into their eyes．
　　When he first came to live with me，I thought，'This dog will not be with me long．He is too good for this world．'But，by the end of the year，he had killed twelve chickens，which I had to pay for…I had pulled him out of a hundred and four-teen street fights…A woman had brought me a dead cat and had called me a murderer．Then I changed my ideas about Montmorency．
　　We had decided where to sleep，so now we had to discuss what to take with us．We began to argue about this，so we a-greed that we had done enough for one night．






■ Chapter 3 We decide what to take
　　The following evening，we discussed what we wanted to take with us．Harris said，'Now get me a piece of pa-per，J．，and write everything down．George，you get a pencil，and I'll make the list．'
　　That's Harris-he tells everybody what to do，and they do all the work．I remember that my Uncle Podger was like Harris…
　　Everybody in the house had to help when Uncle Podger did a job．When they bought a picture once，Aunt Podger asked，'Now，where shall we put this？'
　　'Oh，I'll do it．Don't worry about it．I'll do it all myself，'he said．And then he took off his coat to begin．He sent one of the girls out to buy some nails，and then he sent one of the boys to tell her how big the nails ought to be．'Now，Bill，you go and get my hammer，'he shouted．'And bring me a ruler，Tom．And Jim，I need a ladder-and a kitchen chair，too．Maria，you stay here to hold the light-and Tom，come here！You can give me the picture．'
　　Then he lifted the picture up…and he dropped it．He tried to catch the glass…and he cut himslef．He looked for something to put round his finger，and he could not find anything．So he danced round the house，and he shouted at everybody．
　　Half an hour later，the finger had been tied up，they had bought new glass，and everythng was ready．Uncle Podger tried again．Everybody stood round him．They were all ready to help．Two people held the chair， a third helped him to get on it，a fourth gave him a nail，and a fifth passed him the hammer．He took the nail…and he dropped it！
　　'There，'he said sadly．'Now the nail's gone．'
　　So everybody got down on the ground to look for it．At last we found the nail，but then he lost the hammer．
　　'Where's the hammer？What did I do with the hammer？There are seven of you there，and you don't know where the hammer is！'
　　We found the hammer for him，but then he lost the place on the wall where he was going to put the picture．So each one of us had to get up on the chair and look for the place．And each one of us thought that it was a different place．Then Uncle Podger tried again himself．This time he fell off the chair on to the piano．His head and his body hit the piano at the same time．The music was beautiful，but Uncle Podger's words were not！Aunt Maria was not pleased．She said that she did not want the children to listen to those terrible words．She added calmly，'The next time that you are going to put a picture on the wall，please tell me．Then I can arrange to go and spend a week with my mother．'
　　Uncle Podger got up and tried again，and at midnight the picture was on the wall．It was not very straight，and everyone was very tired and unhappy．Uncle Podger looked at the picture proudly and said，'You see，it was only a little job！'…
　　Harris is like that．So I told him that George would write down the list，and I would do the work．He could get the pencil and the paper．
　　The first list was too long．So we started again．
　　'Now，'George said，'we don't want to take a tent．We can put a cover over the boat at night．It will be like a little house，lovely and warm and comfortable．It's much easier than a tent．'
　　Then we made a list of all the clothes we needed．George told us that he knew all about this kind of thing-and we be-lieved him．We discovered later that this was not true．
　　Next we talked about the food．
　　'First，breakfast，'George began．'We need eggs，cold meat，tea，bread and butter，of course．And for dinner we can take cold chicken legs，tomatoes，cold meat，fruit，cakes，chocolate…We can drink water．'then he added，'And we can take a bottle of whisky，too-for when we are sick，you know．'
　　We did not wish to talk about being sick．But later，we were glad we had taken the whisky．
　　So we made our list，and it was a long one．






■ Chapter 4 We pack
　　The next day，which was Friday，we collected all these things together．In the evening we met to pack．
　　We got a big suitcase for the clothes．There were two large baskets with lids，for the food and for the pans and things to cook with．We moved the table over to the window．Then we put everything in the middle of the floor．
　　After we had done that，we sat there and we looked at it．
　　I said that I would pack．
　　I think that I am very good at packing．It is one of the things that I do best．So I told the others that I would organize it．They agreed to this idea too quickly．That was rather strange．George lit his pipe and sat back in the armchair．Harris put his feet on the table and lit a cigarette．
　　This was not，of course，what I had expected．When I said that I would organize it，I meant that I would tell them what to do．Then I would sit and watch them do it．
　　However，I said nothing，and I started to pack the clothes．It took much longer than I had expected，but in the end it was finished．I sat on the suitcase and closed it．George and Harris watched me with great interest．
　　'Aren't you going to put the boots in？'Harris asked．
　　I looked round，and saw the boots．Why did Harris wait until I had closed the suitcase？
　　George laughed quietly．
　　I opened the suitcase，and I put the boots in．It was not easy！And just as I was going to close the suitcase again，an awful idea came to me．Had I packed my toothbrush？
　　Of course，I had to look for it，and，of course，I could not find it．I had to take everything out again．I found George's tooth-brush．I found Harris's toothbrush，but I could not find mine．In the end，I found it inside a boot．
　　I packed everything again．
　　When I had finished，George asked if the soap was in the suitcase．I said I did not care about the soap．I threw down the lid of the suitcase，and I closed it again．Then I found my cigarettes were inside it．
　　I finished the suitcase at five past ten，and the food was still not packed！
　　Harris said，'We have to start the holiday in twelve hours．Perhaps George and I had better do the rest of the packing．'
　　I agreed，and I sat down．
　　They began quite happily．I said nothing．I only waited．I looked at all the plates and cups，and bottles，and tomatoes，and cakes，etc．I felt that it was soon going to get exciting．
　　It did．They started by breaking a cup．That was just to show you what they could do and to get you interested．Then Harris packed a pan on top of a tomato and…well，they had to pick out the tomato with a teaspoon．
　　And then it was George's turn，and he stepped on the butter．I did not say anything，but I got up and went over to the table and watched them．This annoyed them more than anything，and it made them worried and excited．They stepped on things，and they put things behind them．And then they could not find them when they wanted them．They packed soft things at the bottom of the basket，and then put heavy things on top of them．
　　Then it got worse．After George got the butter off his shoe，they tried to put it in the teapot．At first they could not get it in．Then，when they did get it in，they decided that the teapot was the wrong place．But they could not get the butter out a-gain．However，in the end they did manage to get it out and they put it down on a chair．Harris sat on it，and when he stood up，the butter stuck to his trousers．Then they looked for the butter all over the room．In the end，George got behind Harris，and he saw it．
　　'There it is！'he cried．
　　'Where？'Harris asked，and he turned round quickly．
　　'Stand still！'George shouted．
　　When they got the butter off Harris，they packed it in the teapot again．
　　Montmorency was in all this，of course．He sat down on things just when George and Harris were going to pack them；he put his leg into the sugar；he ran away with the teaspoons．He pretended that the oranges were rats，and he got into the food basket and killed three of them．
　　The packing was completed at ten to one in the morning，and we all went to bed．George said，'What time shall I wake you two？'
　　Harris said，'Seven．'
　　I said'Six．'
　　In the end we said，'Wake us at half past six，George．'






■ Chapter 5 We start our holiday
　　It was Mrs Poppets who woke me the next morning．
　　She said，'Do you know that it's nearly nine o'clock，sir？'
　　'What！'I cried，and I jumped out of bed．I woke Harris and told him．
　　He said，'I thought you told us to get up at six？'
　　'I did，'I answered．
　　'Well，why didn't you wake me then？'he asked．'Now we won't be on the water until after twelve o'clock．'
　　Then we remembered．We looked at George．He was still asleep．Now，it makes me very angry when I see another man asleep and I am awake．We decided to wake George．We ran across the room，and we pulled the bedclothes off him．Harris hit him with a shoe，and I shouted in his ear．He woke up．
　　'Wh…aa…t，'he began．
　　'Get up，you fat，lazy thing！'Harris shouted．'It's a quarter to ten！'
　　Then we began to get ready，and we remembered that we had packed the toothbrushes．So we had to go downstairs to get them out of the suitcase．
　　Finally，we were ready and Harris said，'We need a good breakfast inside us today．'While we were eating，George got the newspaper and read us interesting pieces from it-pieces about people who had been killed on the river，and interesting reports about the weather．The weather report for that day said，'Rain，cold，wet to fine，some thunder，and an east wind'．But weather reports make me angry anyway．They always tell you what the weather was like yesterday，or the day before．It is never tooday's weather．It is always wrong．I remember that one autumn I went on holiday…
　　On that holiday，the weather reports in the newspaper were always wrong．on Monday it said，'Heavy rain，with thunder'．So we did not go out that day．All day people passed our house．They were all going out，happy and smiling．The sun was shining and there were no clouds in the sky．
　　'Ah，'we said，as we watched them，'they'll be very wet when they come back，though．'
　　And we laughed．Then we sat down by the fire and read our books．
　　At twelve o'clock the room was too hot，and the sun was still shining．
　　'Well，it will rain this afternoon，then，'we told ourselves．
　　The rain never came．
　　The next morning，we read that it was going to be sunny and very hot．So we dressed in light clothes，and we went out．Half an hour later，it began to rain hard，and a very cold wind blew up．And this went on all day．We came home with colds，and we went to bed…
　　But on the morning of our holiday it was bright and sunny，and George could not make us unhappy．So he went to work．
　　Harris and I finished the rest of the breakfast．Then we car-ried all our luggage into the road．We tried to get a taxi．Usual-ly taxis come along every three minutes．In fact，there are usu-ally too many taxis．However，that morning we waited twenty minutes for a taxi．A crowd of interested people collected to watch us．I think it was because we had so much luggage．There was a big suitcase，a small bag，two baskets，several blan-kets，some fruit in a brown paper bag，some pans，some umbrel-las and four or five coats and raincoats．After a very long time，a taxi arrived and stopped for us．We packed our things into it，kicked two of Montmorency's friends out of the taxi，and started on our holiday The crowd of peopel waved goodbye to us．






■ Chapter 6 On the river
　　At Kingston our boat was waiting for us．Harris and I put all our things into it，and we moved off along the River Thames．Montmorency was at the front of the boat．We travelled along the river without any accidents．Well，there was only one little accident．That was when the boat hit the river bank，and Harris fell over backwards．When we came to Hamp-ton Court Palace，Harris asked me if I had ever been in the maze there．He told me a story about it…
　　He went into the maze once，to show a friend the way．He had studied a map of the maze，and so he knew it was very easy to get out of it again．Harris said to his friend，'We'll just go in and walk around for ten minutes，and then we'll come out and get some lunch．It's easy，you see．You just keep taking the first turning to the right．'
　　Soon after they had gone in，they met some people．These people said that they had been there for three quarters of an hour．They said they wanted to get out．Harris said，'Follow me！I'm going out myself in about ten minutes．'
　　The people all said that Harris was very kind，and they began to follow him．
　　As they were going along，they collected other people who wanted to get out．In the end，all the people in the maze were following Harris．There were about twenty of them．Some of them had thought that they were never going to see their friends and their families again．One woman was carrying a baby．She held on to Harris's arm because she did not want to lose him．
　　Harris continued to turn to the right，but it seemed to be a long way．At last，Harris's friend said to him，'This must be a very big maze．'
　　'One of the biggest in Europe，'Harris answered．
　　'Yes，it must be，'his friend continued，'because we've walked about three kilometres already．'
　　Harris began to think that it was rather strange，but he went on．After some time，they came to a piece of cake on the ground．Harris's friend said that they had passed the piece of cake earlier．Harris replied，'No！lmpos-sible！'
　　The woman with the baby said，'No，I took it from the baby，and I threw it there myself．It was just before we met you．In fact，I wish I never had met you，'she added．
　　Harris got angry then，and he took out his map．He showed it to the people，but one man said，'A map's no good when you don't know where you are．'
　　So then Harris said that the best thing was to go back to the entrance and start again．Everybody agreed，and they all turned and followed Harris the other way．
　　After ten minutes they found themselves in the centre of the maze．Harris was going to pretend that he wanted to be in the centre，but the crowd looked dangerous．So Harris decided to say that it was an accjdent．
　　Anyway，now they knew where they were on the map，and it looked easy．So they all started off again for the third time．
　　And three minutes later，they were back in the centre again．
　　After that，every time they tried again，they arrived back in the centre．Harris took out his map again，but this made the crowd angry．They told him what to do with his map．Harris felt that the crowd was not very grateful to him．
　　Then they all started to shout，and in the end the keeper came．He climbed up a ladder，and he called to them，'Wait，there！l'll come and get you．'
　　But he was a young keeper，and he was new to the job，so when he got into the maze，he could not find them．
　　Then he got lost．From time to time，they saw him as he ran past，on the other side of the hedge．He shouted，'Wait there！I'm coming！'
　　Then，five minutes later，he appeared again in the same place．He asked them why they had moved．
　　They had to wait for one of the old keepers to come back from lunch and let them out…
　　Harris said that it was a fine maze，and we agreed that we would try to get George into it on the way back．






■ Chapter 7 Harris gets angry
　　Harris told me about the maze as we were passing through Molesey lock．Our boat was the only one in the lock that day．Usually it is very busy．On Sundays，when the weather is fine，there are boats everywhere．Everybody comes down to the river．They wear brightly coloured clothes，and the river is full of colour-yellow，and blue，and orange，and green，and white，and red and pink．
　　At Hampton Harris wanted to get out and have a look at the church there，but I refused to stop．I have never liked visiting churches，but Harris loves them．He said，'I've looked forward to visiting Hampton Church ever since we decided to make this trip．'He added，'I only came on the trip because I thought we were going there！'
　　I reminded him about George．I said，'We've got to get the boat up to Shepperton by five o'clock to meet him．'
　　Then Harris got angry with George．'Why does George have to play around all day？Why has he left us with this big，heavy boat to tow up and down the river？Why couldn't George come and do some work？Why didn't he take a day's holiday and come down with us？The bank！Ha！What good is he at the bank？'He stopped for a moment and then he continued，'I never see him doing any work there．He sits behind a bit of glass all day，and he pretends to do something．What's the good of a man behind a bit of glass？I have to work．Why can't George work？What does he do at the bank？What good are banks，anyway？They take all your money，and then，when you write out a cheque，they send it back！They say you've spent all your money！What's the good of that？If George was here，we could go to see that church．Anyway，I don't be-lieve he's at the bank．He's playing about somewhere，that's what he's doing．And we've got to do all the work！… I'm going to get out and have a drink！'
　　I told him that there were no pubs nearby，and then he started shouting about the river．'What good is the river？We'll all die of thirst！No pubs！'（It's better to let Harris go on shouting when he gets angry．Then he gets tired，and he is quiet afterwards．）
　　I reminded him that we had water in the boat．Then he started shouting about water．He said drinks like that made people ill．
　　However，he said that he must drink something．He climbed onto the seat and he bent down to get the bottle out of the bas-ket．It was at the bottom，and he had to bend down，lower and lower．At the same time，he was trying to steer the boat，and he pulled the wrong rope．The boat turned sharply and bumped into the bank of the river，and Harris fell into the basket．He stood there on his head，and he held on to the side of the boat．His legs were in the air．He could not move in case he fell over．He had to stay there until I could catch his legs and pull him back．And that made him more angry．
　　We stopped under the trees by Kempton Park，and we had lunch．It is very pretty there，on the grass by the river，under the trees．We had an excellent meal，and Harris calmed down and began to enjoy himself again．
　　By half past three，we had reached Sunbury lock．Then we went up to Walton，which is quite an interesting place．Julius Caesar stayed there with his soldiers．Queen Elizabeth I，she was there too．You can never get away from that woman．She was everywhere．
　　Next we came to Halliford and Shepperton．There is an old church at Shepperton，and I was worried in case Harris wanted to go and visit it．I saw him looking towards it as we came near，but I moved the boat quickly，and Harris's cap fell into the water．We had to get it back，of course．Luckily，he was very angry with me，and so he forgot about his church．
　　As we came up to the lock at Weybridge，we saw something brightly coloured on one of the lock gates． When we looked closer，we saw that it was George．Montmorency started to bark madly．I shouted，and Harris called out wildly．George waved his cap and yelled back to us．The lock-keeper ran out because he thought someone had fallen in the water．He seemed annoyed when he saw that no one had fallen in．






■ Chapter 8 George starts work
　　We decided that now George was there，he was going to do some work．He did not want to work， of course．'I've had a bad day at the bank，'he explained．
　　Harris，who is sometimes a little cruel，said，'Ah！And now you're going to have a bad time on the river for a change．A change is good for you．Come on！Get out of the boat and tow！'
　　George could not refuse，really，but he did say，'Perhaps it would be better if I stayed in the boat and prepared the meal．You two can tow the boat． 'then he added，'It's very difficult to prepare a meal and you both look tired．'
　　Our only reply was to give him the rope．So he started walk-ing，and he pulled the boat behind him．
　　Sometimes people forget that they are towing a boat，and later，George told us a story about this…
　　George had once seen a man and a young lady who were walking by the side of the river．They were pulling a rope behind them and they were talking to each other．They did not notice that there was no boat on the end of the rope．Of course，they probably had a boat on the end of the rope when they started out．But it had disappeared．The two young people were not worried about this．They had their rope．They did not seem to care that there was no boat．George was going to call out to tell them about it But，just then，he had an idea．He took hold of the rope，and he tied it to his own boat．Then he and his three fat，heavy friends sat in the back of their boat，and lit their pipes．And that young man and young woman towed George and his friends up to Marlow．It was when they reached the lock that they looked back．Suddenly they understood that they had been towing the wrong boat．George said，'I've never seen anyone look as sad as those two young people then！'
　　The young man was a bit annoyed．In fact，he was probably going to say something angry to George and his friends．But just then，the young woman cried wildly，'Oh，Henry，then where's Aunt Mary？'…'Did they ever get the old lady back？'Harris asked．George replied that he did not know．
　　But the most exciting thing of all is to let girls tow your boat．Let me tell you about it…First of all，you need three girls．You always need three girls to tow a boat．Two of them hold the rope，and the other one runs here and there and laughs all the time．
　　They usually begin by tying themselves up in the rope．They get it round their legs，and then they have to sit down to untie it．Next，they get it round their necks．When they finally get it right，they always start by running．They pull the boat much too fast．After a few minutes，they are tired，and so they stop suddenly．They all sit down on the grass，and they start to laugh．Meanwhile，your boat goes out into the middle of the river，and it starts to turn round．Then they stand up and are surprised．
　　'Oh，look！'they say．'The boat's gone into the middle of the river！'
　　After this，they pull you along quite well for a time．Then one of them decides to stop for something else．So the boat runs aground in shallow water near the river bank．You jump up，and you push the boat off into deep water．You shout to them，'Don't stop！'
　　'Yes，what's the matter？'they shout back．
　　'Don't stop！'you cry loudly．
　　'Don't what？'
　　'Don't stop… go on… go on！'
　　'Go back，Emily，and see what they want，'one of them says．
　　And Emily comes back and asks，'What is it？Is anything wrong？'
　　'No！'you shout．'It's all right！But go on！Don't stop！'
　　'Why not？'
　　'Because we can't steer the boat if you stop．'
　　'Why not？'
　　'You must keep the boat moving！'
　　'Oh，all right．I'll tell them．Are we doing everything else all right？'
　　'Oh，yes，very nicely-but don't stop！'
　　'I see．Oh，give me my hat，please．It's over there．'
　　You find her hat，and you give it to her．But then another girl comes．She thinks she will have her hat，too．And then they take Mary's hat for her．Mary does not want it，so they bring it back．Then they want a comb．It is about twenty minutes before they start again．Then，at the next corner，they see a cow．You have to stop，and leave the boat，to chase the cow away…
　　Anyway，this time it was George who towed us on to Penton Hook．There we discussed the important question of where to spend the night．We had decided to sleep on the boat．There-fore we could stay there，or we could go on past Staines．In the end，we decided to continue to Runnymede．
　　Later we all wished we had stopped at Penton Hook．






■ Chapter 9 Our first night on the boat
　　After some time，Harris and I began to think that Bell Weir lock had disappeared．'Perhaps someone has tak-en it away，'we said．George had towed the boat as far as Staines，and we had towed it from there．It seemed to get heav-ier and heavier．We began to think that we were right and that someone had moved the lock．But，finally，at half past seven，we reached it and got through it．By now we just wanted to eat and to go to bed．So we stopped before we reached Magna Charta Island．It was quite a pretty place and we tied our boat to a big tree．
　　We were looking forward to having something to eat then，but George said，'No！It's better to put the cover on the boat first，before it gets too dark．All our work will be finished then．We'll be able to sit down and enjoy our meal．'
　　None of us had realized that it would be so difficult to fix the cover．There were five pieces of metal and you put these into special holes on the side of the boat．The pieces of metal were half circles，and when you had put them into the holes，you just had to pull the cover over them．
　　We thought it would probably take about ten minutes．
　　We were wrong．
　　We took the pieces of metal，and we began to drop them into their holes．You would not expect this to be dangerous work，but it was．
　　First of all，the pieces of metal would not fit into their holes．We had to jump on them，and kick them，and beat them．And when we got one in，we found that it was the wrong piece of metal for those holes．So we had to take it out again．
　　At last we got them finished．Then we only had to put the cover on．George took one end，and he fastened it over the front of the boat．Harris stood in the middle of the boat to take the cover from George．I stayed at the back of the boat to take the end of the cover from Harris．
　　George did his job all right，but it was new work to Harris and he did everything wrong．
　　I do not know how he did it，and Harris himself could not explain it later．After ten minutes of really hard work，he was inside the cover．He could not get out．He fought the cover hard- and knocked George over．Then George got angry and he began to fight，too．George could not get out of the cover ei-ther．
　　At the time，I did not know anything about all this．I did not understand what was happening anyway．They had told Mont-morency and me to stand and wait．So Montmorency and I stood there and waited．We could see that the cover was mov-ing about quite violently．However，we thought that it was all necessary for the job．We did nothing because they had told us to wait．
　　We also heard many bad words coming from under the cover．Montmorency and I decided that this was because the job was very difficult．
　　We waited for some time，but everything seemed to get worse．Finally George's head appeared over the side of the boat．It said，'We can't breathe under here！Why don't you help us，you great stupid thing！'
　　So I went and helped them．Harris's face was nearly black，so I was just in time．
　　It took another half an hour after that to fix the cover．And then we started to prepare supper．We needed some hot water to make tea，so we put the water on the stove at the front of the boat，and we went to the back．We pretended that we were not interested in the water at all．We wanted it to think we did not care if it got hot or not．We began to get the other things out．
　　That is the only way to get hot water on the river．If the water knows that you are waiting for it，it will never get hot．You have to go away and begin your meal without it．You must not look at it．Then you will soon hear it making a lot of noise，because it wants to be made into tea．
　　It is also a good idea to talk very loudly to each other．You must say that you do not want any tea，that you do not need any tea，and that you are not going to have any tea．You get very near the water and you shout，'I don't want any tea．Do you，George？'
　　And George shouts back，'Oh，no．I don't like tea．We'll have milk．'
　　This makes the water very angry，and it gets hot very fast．
　　We did this，and，when everything else was ready，the tea was ready，too．Then we sat down to have supper．We really wanted that supper．We needed that supper．And for thirty-five minutes nobody on the boat spoke．
　　After supper，we sat and smiled at each other．We smiled at Montmorency，too．We loved everybody．We sat back，we lit our pipes，and we began to talk．
　　George told us about something very funny that happened to his father once…
　　When he was young，George's father was travelling with a friend．One night they stopped at a little hotel．They spent the evening there with some other young men．After a very happy evening they went to bed．It was late，and，by that time，they（George's father and George's father's friend）were feeling quite happy themselves．Anyway，they were going to sleep in the same room，but in different beds．When they got into the room，they dropped their light，which went out．So they had to undress and get into bed in the dark．They thought they were getting into separate beds．However，because they could not see， they both got into the same one．One of them got in with his head at the top of the bed．The other one got in on the other side of the bed．He lay with his feet by the first one's head．
　　Nobody spoke for a moment．Then George's father said，'Joe！'
　　'What's the matter，Tom？'Joe replied，from the other end of the bed．
　　'Why，there's a man in my bed，'George's father said．'His feet are here，next to me．'
　　'Well，that's very strange，Tom，'Joe answered，'but there's a man in my bed，too．'
　　'What are you going to do？'George's father asked．
　　'Well，I'm going to throw him out，'Joe replied．
　　'So am I，'George's father said，bravely．
　　There was a short fight，and then there were two heavy bangs on the floor．After a moment or two，a rather sad voice said，'I say，Tom！'
　　'Yes？'
　　'How have you got on？'
　　'Well，to tell the truth，my man's thrown me out．'
　　'My man's thrown me out，too…I say，this isn't a very good hotel，is it？'…
　　At the end of George's story，Harris asked，'What was the name of the hotel？'
　　'The Riverside，'George replied．'Why？'
　　'Ah，it isn't the same hotel，then，'Harris answered．
　　'What do you mean？'George asked．
　　'Well，it's strange，'Harris said，'but the same thing hap-pened to my father once．I've often heard him tell the story．'
　　After that，we went to bed，but I slept very badly．






■ Chapter10 Our first morning
　　I woke up at six o'clock the next morning，and I found that George was awake，too．We both tried to go to sleep again，but we could not．This was because we did not need to get up early．We could sleep for another two or three hours．But we both felt we would die if we tried to sleep for another five minutes．
　　George said that the same thing had happened to him a few months before．He told me a story about it…
　　At that time George had rooms in the house of a lady called Mrs Gippings．One evening his watch stopped at a quarter past eight．He did not realize this then．When he went to bed，he took off his watch，and he did not look at it．
　　This happened in the winter，so it was dark in the mornings，anyway．When George woke up，he looked at his watch．It was a quarter past eight．
　　'Good heavens！'George cried．'I have to be at the bank by nine o'clock！'And he threw down the watch and jumped out of bed．He had a cold bath and he dressed．Then he ran and looked at his watch．It had started to go again，and it was twenty to nine．
　　George took his watch and ran downstairs．The dining-room was dark and silent．There was no fire，no breakfast．George was very angry with Mrs G．He decided to tell her this later，in the evening．Then he caught hold of his coat，his hat and his umbrella，and ran to the front door．lt'was locked！George said that Mrs G．was a lazy old woman．Then he unlocked the door and ran out into the street．
　　For a few hundred metres he ran as fast as he could．But，suddenly，he noticed that there were not many people about．He also noticed that the shops were not open．It was a very dark and foggy morning．However，it seemed very strange that they had closed the shops because of the fog．He had to go to work，so why should other people stay in bed？
　　George could see only three people．One of them was a policeman，one was a man who was taking vegetables to the market，and one was a taxi-driver．
　　George looked at his watch．It was five to nine．For a moment，he stood there without moving．He wondered if he was dreaming．He felt his wrist，and bent down and felt his legs．Then，with his watch in his hand，he went up to the policeman．
　　'What time is it，please？'he asked the policeman．
　　'What's the time？'the policeman repeated．'Well，listen．'
　　Just then George heard a clock…one…two…three．'But that's only three times！'George said，when it had finished．
　　'Well，how many times do you want？'the policeman replied．
　　'Why，nine，of course，'George said，and he held out his watch to the policeman．
　　'Do you know where you live？'the policeman asked．
　　George thought for a minute，and then he told the policeman the address．
　　'Well，I think you should go back there quietly，'the policeman continued．'And take your watch with you！'
　　So George went back．
　　At first，he thought he would go to bed again．However，he did not like the idea of having to get up again later．So he decided to go to sleep in the armchair．
　　But he could not get to sleep．He tried to read，but that was no good either．Finally，he put on his coat again，and he went out for a walk．
　　He felt very lonely and miserable．He met policemen who looked at him strangely．They followed him about．He began to feel that he really had done something wrong．He started to hide in dark corners whenever he saw a policeman．
　　Of course，then the policemen wanted to know what he was doing．George said，'Nothing．I'm just going for a walk．'But they did not believe him．In the end，two policemen went back to the house with him．They wanted to know if he really did live there．They watched him go in with his key．Then they stood on the opposite side of the road，and they watched the house．
　　When he got in，he thought，'I'll light the fire，and then I'll make some breakfast．'But he made a lot of noise，and he was afraid that Mrs Gippings would wake up．She would hear the noise and think that he was a burglar．Then she would open the window and shout，'Help！Police！'the two policemen would come and arrest George，and take him away．So he stopped trying to prepare breakfast，and he put on his coat．Then he sat in the armchair and he waited for Mrs Gippings．She came down at half past seven．
　　George said that，since then，he had never got up too early again…
　　When George had finished his story，we decided to wake up Harris．It was hard work．In the end we had to use quite a sharp piece of metal．Harris sat up suddenly then．Montmoren-cy had been asleep on Harris's chest，and he went flying across the boat．
　　After that，we pulled up the cover and we put our heads over the side of the boat．We looked down at the water．The night before，we had decided to get up early．We would throw off the cover and we would jump into the water，with shouts of happi-ness．Then we would enjoy a long swim．
　　But now that morning had come， it did not seem to be a very good idea．The water looked wet and cold．The wind felt cold，too．
　　'Well，who's going to go in for a swim first？'Harris said fi-nally．
　　Nobody hurried to be the first one．George put his head back inside the boat．Montmorency barked with horror at the idea．Harris said it would he difficult to climb back into the boat a-gain from the water．Then he went back into the boat to look for his trousers．
　　I did not want to give up the idea absolutely．I decided to go down to the edge of the river，and then splash some water over myself．So I went out on to the river bank，and I began to move carefully along the branch of a tree which was over the water．
　　It was very cold，and I thought I would not splash water over myself，after all．I would go back into the boat and dress．I turned- and just then the stupid branch broke．The next minute，I was in the middle of the river，with half a litre of the Thames inside me．
　　'Good heavens！Old J．'s gone in！'Harris said．
　　'Is it all right？'George called out．
　　'Lovely，'I replied．'Why don't you come in？'
　　But they did not want to．
　　When I got back to the boat，I was very cold．I wanted to put on my shirt as quickly as possible．By accident，I dropped it into the water．This made me very angry，but George started to laugh．'I can't see anything to laugh at，'I told George．He just went on laughing！In fact，I never saw a man laugh so much．In the end，I became really angry with him．I told him what I thought about him．He laughed more loudly．And then，just as I was getting the shirt back out of the water，I noticed that it was not my shirt．So I began to laugh，too．I looked at George，who was laughing so much．Then I looked at the wet shirt- and I laughed more and more．Because I was laughing so much，I dropped the shirt in the water again．
　　'Aren't you going to get it out？'George cried，between his shouts of laughter．
　　At first I could not answer him，because I was laughing so much．In the end，I managed to say，'It isn't my shirt．It's yours！'
　　I have never seen a man's face change so quickly．I tried to make him see that it was very funny，but he did not agree with me．
　　After that，it was time for breakfast，and we decided to have eggs．Harris said he would cook them．He said he was very good at doing eggs．People who had eaten his eggs never want-ed any other food afterwards．'If they can't get my eggs， they won't eat，'he said，'and they die．'
　　So we gave him the pan，and all the eggs which had not bro-ken．'Go on，then，'we said．'Begin！'
　　Harris had some trouble when he tried to break the eggs．He had trouble stopping them from getting onto his trousers．And he had more trouble trying to stop them from going up his arms．Finally，he managed to get about six of the eggs into the pan．Then he sat down and started to cook them．
　　It seemed to be very difficult work．Whenever he went near the pan，he burnt himself．Then he dropped everything， and danced about，and waved his hands，and shouted．In fact， every time George and I looked at him，he was doing this．At first we thought it was necessary to do this to cook the eggs．
　　Once Montmorency went and looked into the pan，but he burnt himself．Then he started dancing and shouting，too．It was all very exciting，and George and I were quite sorry when it finished．






■ Chapter 11 Hotels and tinned fruit
　　After breakfast I was sitting by the river，and thinking，when George said，'Perhaps，when you've rested enough，you could help to wash the plates and things．'so I cleaned the pan with some wood and grass-and George's wet shirt．
　　Then we started to move up the river again，past Old Wind-sor，which is very pretty．After that，the river is not very inter-esting until you get to Boveney．George and I were towing the boat then．As we were passing Datchet，George asked me if I remembered our first trip up the river．On that trip we reached Datchet at ten o'clock at night．All we wanted to do was to eat and go to bed．
　　I replied，'Yes，I do remember it．'I remember it well．In fact，it will be some time before I forget it…
　　It was one Saturday in August．There was George，and Harris，and me．We were tired and hungry．When we got to Datchet，we took out of the boat the basket of food， the two bags，and the coats and things．Then we began to look for somewhere to stay．We passed a very pretty little hotel，but there were no roses round the door．I wanted somewhere with roses round the door．I do not know why．Anyway，I said，'Oh，we don't want to go there．Let's look for a little hotel with roses round the door．'
　　So we went on until we came to another hotel．That was a very nice one，too，and it did have roses．But Harris did not like the man who was standing by the front door．Harris said that he did not look like a nice man，and he was wearing ugly boots．So we went on．We walked for some time，but we did not see any more hotels．Then we met a man and we decided to ask him．
　　'Excuse me，do you know any nice little hotels near here？'we said．
　　'Well，'he said，'you're coming away from them．Go back，and you'll come to the Black Horse．'
　　We said，'Oh，we've been there，and we didn't like it．There were no roses round the door．'
　　'Well，then，'he said，'there's the Travellers'rest just beyond it．Have you tried that？'
　　Harris replied that we did not want to go there．We did not like the man who was staying there．Harris did not like the colour of his hair．He did not like his boots either．
　　'Well，I don't koow what you're going to do，then，'the man answered，'because they are the only two hotels here．'
　　'No other hotels！'Harris cried．
　　'None，'the man replied．
　　'What are we going to do now？'Harris asked．
　　Then George spoke．He said，'You two can ask someone to build you a hotel．I'm going back to the Black Horse！'
　　So we went back to the Black Horse．
　　'Good evening，'the man at the desk said．
　　'Oh，good evening，'George answered．'We want three beds，please．'
　　'I'm sorry，sir，'the man replied，'but we haven't got three beds．'
　　'Oh，wgll，it doesn't matter-two beds，then．Two of us can sleep in one bed，can't we？'George continued．He looked at Harris and me．
　　Harris said，'Oh，yes．'He thought that George and I could sleep in one bed very easily．
　　'I'm very sorry，sir，'the man repeated．'We haven't got any beds．We've already got three men in one bed．'
　　We picked up our things，and we went over to the Travellers'rest．It was a pretty little place．I said I thought it was better than the other hotel．Harris said it would be all right．We would not look at the man with red hair and ugly boots．
　　The people at the Travellers'rest did not wait to hear what we wanted．The lady at the desk said she had already sent away fourteen people．There was no room of any kind．We asked her if she knew somewhere we could spend the night．She said there was a little house along the road…
　　We did not wait．We picked up the basket，the bags and the coats，and we ran along the road．
　　The people there laughed at us．There were only three beds in the house，and there were seven men there already．
　　Someone said，'Why don't you try the little shop next to the Black Horse？'
　　So we went back along the road，but there were no beds at the little shop．However，there was an old lady in the shop．She said she had a friend who had some rooms．She added that she would take us there．
　　The old woman walked very slowly，and it took us twenty minutes to get to her friend's house．During the walk，she told us about all the pains she had in her back．When we got there，there were already some people in her friend's rooms．From there we went to number 27．Number 27 was full．They sent us to number 32，and number 32 was full．
　　Then we went back along the road．Suddenly Harris sat down on the basket．He said he was not going to move．He added that it seemed to be nice and quiet there， and he said that he would like to die there．
　　Just then，a little boy came past．'Do you know any old people that we can frighten，so that they will give us their beds？'we asked him．
　　'No，I don't，'the boy answered，but he added that his mother would give us a room．And that was where we spent the night-in two very short beds．
　　After that，we were never quite so difficult about hotels…
　　On our present trip，though，nothing exciting happened．We continued slowly on our way，and we stopped for lunch near Monkey Island．
　　We decided to have cold meat for lunch．Then，after that，George brought out a tin of fruit．We love tinned fruit，all three of us．We looked at the picture on the tin．We thought about the fruit．We imagined the taste of it．We smiled at each other，and Harris got out a spoon．Then we looked for the tin-opener．We took everything out of the big basket．We took everything out of the bags．There was no tin-opener．We pulled up the boards at the bottom of the boat．We put everything out on the grass by the river，and we shook every-thing．There was no tin-opener！
　　Then Harris tried to open the tin with a little knife，and he cut himself badly．George tried with some scissors．The scissors flew up，and nearly hit him in the eye．I tried to make a hole in the tin with the sharp end of a piece of metal．But I missed．As a result，I fell in the water，and the tin flew away and broke a cup．
　　Then we all got angry．We took that tin，and we put it on the grass by the river．Harris went into a field and got a big，sharp stone．I got a long，thick piece of wood．George held the tin，and Harris put the sharp end of his stone against the top of it．I took the piece of wood，and held it high in the air．Then I brought it down as hard as I could．
　　It was George's hat that saved his life that day．He keeps that hat now．On a winter evening，when men are telling sto-ries about the dangers they have known，George brings out his hat．He shows it to his friends．Then he tells the story again-and he adds more details to it each time．
　　Harris was not hurt too badly．
　　After that，I took the tin away．I beat it until I was exhaust-ed and miserable．Then Harris took it．
　　We beat it until it was long and thin．We beat it until it was square．We hit it with the wood until it was every shape there is-but we could not make a hole in it．Then George tried，and he knocked it into a shape which was strange，and terrible，and ugly．It frightened him，and he threw away the piece of wood．Then the three of us sat round that tin on the grass，and we looked at it．
　　There was one big line across the top of the tin that looked like a mouth．It seemed to be laughing at us，and this made us very angry．So Harris ran at it，and picked it up．He threw it，as hard as he could，into the middle of the river．As it went down into the water，we shouted awful things at it．Then we got into the boat，and we left that place，and did not stop until we reached Maidenhead．
　　We went through Maidenhead quickly，but，after that，we travelled along more slowly．We stopped for tea just before we got to Cookham．By the time we got through the lock it was evening．
　　It was a bit windy，and someone had made a mistake because the wind was behind us．That does not usually happen．But that afternoon the wind actually helped us on our way，and the boat moved quite fast．
　　There were no other people on the river，except for three old men．They were sitting in a boat，and they were fishing．As we got nearer，we could see that they were old．They were also quite serious，because they were watching their fishing-lines very carefully．The sun was going down，and it threw a red light across the water．It was very beautiful，and we felt that we were sailing into some strange land．
　　We did not sail into some strange land．We went straight in-to that boat with the three old men in it．At first，we did not know what had happened．But then， from the words which rose on the evening air，we understood that we were near peo-ple．We also understood that those people were not happy．We had knocked those three old men from their seats，and they were all lying on the bottom of their boat．They were trying to stand up and they were picking fish off themselves．As they worked，they shouted unkind things about us-not just the usual things，but special things about us，and about our families．
　　Harris called out，You ought to be pleased that something so exciting has happened to you！'He added that he was very unhappy to hear men of their age use those bad words．
　　But the three old men did not seem to agree with Harris．
　　At Marlow we left the boat near the bridge，and we went to spend the night in a hotel．






■ Chapter 12 Montmorency and the cat
　　On Monday morning， we got up quite early and we went to swim before breakfast． On the way back， Mont－morency behaved very stupidly．
　　The only thing that Montmorency and I disagree about is cats．I like cats． Montmorency does not．
　　When I meet a cat， I say hello to it． Then I bend down and I stroke it gently， behind the ears and along the side of its head．The cat likes this．It puts its tail up and it pushes itself against my legs．And there is love and peace．When Montmorency meets a cat， everybody knows about it， and a lot of bad words are used．
　　I do not really blame Montmorency（usually I just hit him，or throw stones at him），because dogs are like that．They hate cats． But that morning， Montmorency wished that he had not argued with a cat．
　　As we were coming back from the river， a cat ran out from one of the houses， and it began to walk across the road． Mont-morency saw the cat， gave a shout of real happiness， and ran af－ter it．
　　It was a big， black cat．I have never seen a bigger cat． It had lost half its tail and one of its ears， but it looked calm and hap-py．
　　Montmorency ran at that cat as fast as he could，but the cat did not hurry． It did not seem to understand that its life was in danger． It walked on quietly until the enemy was near it．Then it turned and sat down in the middle of the road． It looked at Montmorency in a quiet way， and it seemed to say，'Yes？ You want me？'
　　Montmorency is quite a brave dog， but there was something in the way the cat looked at him． It frightened him．He stopped suddenly， and he looked at the cat． They did not speak， of course， but it was easy to imagine their conversation．
　　THE CAT：Can I do anything for you？
　　MONTMORENCY：No…no，thanks．
　　THE CAT： Do please tell me if there is something you want，won't you？
　　MONTMORENCY（ who moves backwards down the road）：Oh， no． Not at all…certainly…I… I'm afraid I've made a mistake．I thought I knew you…I'm sorry．
　　THE CAT：Notat all．Are you quite sure you don't want any－thing now？
　　MONTMORENCY（ who continues to move back）：Not at all…thanks…not at all…very kind of you…Good morning．
　　THE CAT：Good morning．
　　Then the cat stood up and continued along the road． Mont-morency， with his tail between his legs， walked behind us． He hoped that nobody would notice him．
　　Now， if you say' Cats！'to Montmorency， he looks up at you， and his eyes beg you，' No， please！'
　　After this we did our shopping， went back to the boat， and moved off along the river again．However， at Hambledon lock，we found that we had no water．So we went to ask the lock-keeper for some． George spoke for us． He said，' Oh， please，could you give us a little water？''Of course，'the old man replied．'Just take what you want and leave the rest．'
　　'Thank you very much，'George said，and he looked round．'But where is it？'
　　'It's where it always is， my boy，'the lock－keeper answered．'It's behind you．'
　　George looked round again．' I can't see it，'he said．
　　' Why？ Where are your eyes？'the man said， and he turned George towards the river．
　　'Oh！'George cried．' But we can't drink the river， you know．'
　　'No， but you can drink some of it，'the old man replied．' That's what I've drunk for fifteen years．'
　　We got some water from another house．
　　After we had got our water， we went on towards Wargrave，but before we got there， we stopped for lunch．
　　We were sitting in a field near the river，and we were just going to start eating． Harris was preparing the food， and George and I were waiting with our plates．
　　'Have you got a spoon？'Harris asked．'I need a spoon．'
　　The basket was behind us， and George and I both turned to get a spoon． It took about five seconds．When we looked back again， Harris and the food had gone．It was an open field， and there were no trees．There was nowhere to hide． He had not fallen in the river， because we were between him and the water．
　　George and I looked round．Then we looked at each other．Harris had gone—disappeared！ Sadly，we looked again at the place where Harris and the food had been．And then， to our horror， we saw Harris's head-and only his head-in the grass．The face was very red and very angry．
　　George was the first to speak．
　　'Say something！'he cried．'Are you alive or dead？ Where is the rest of you？'
　　' Oh，don't be so stupid！'Harris's head said． 'It's your fault．You made me sit there．You did it to annoy me！ Here，take the food！'
　　And from the middle of the grass the food appeared， and then Harris came out， dirty and wet．
　　Harris had not known that he had been sitting on the edge of a hole．The grass had hidden it．Then，suddenly，he had fall－en backwards into it．He said he had not known what was hap－pening to him．He thought， at first， that it was the end of the world．
　　Harris still believes that George and I planned it．






■ Chapter 13 Harris and the swans
　　After lunch， we moved on to Wargrave and Shiplake，and then to Sonning．We got out of the boat there， and we walked about for an hour or more． It was too late then to go on past Reading， so we decided to go back to one of the Shiplake islands．We would spend the night there．
　　When we had tied the boat up by one of the islands，it was still early．George said it would be a good idea to have a really excellent supper．He said we could use all kinds of things，and all the bits of food we had left．We could make it really inter－esting， and we could put everything into one big pan together．George said he would show us how to do it．
　　We liked this idea，so George collected wood to make a fire．Harris and I started to prepare the potatoes． This became a very big job．We began quite happily． However， by the time we had finished our first potato，we were feeling very miserable．There was almost no potato left．George came and looked at it．
　　' Oh， that's no good． You've done it wrong！Do it like this！'he said．
　　We worked very hard for twenty－five minutes．At the end of that time we had done four potatoes．We refused to continue．
　　George said it was stupid to have only four potatoes， so we washed about six more．Then we put them in the pan without doing anything else to them．We also put in some carrots and other vegetables． But George looked at it， and he said there was not enough．So then we got out both the food baskets．We took out all the bits of things that were left， and we put them in，too． In fact， we put in everything we could find． I remember that Montmorency watched all this，and he looked very thoughtful．Then he walked away．He came back a few minutes later with a dead rat in his mouth． He wanted to give it to us for the meal．We did not know if he really wanted to put it in the pan，or if he wanted to tell us what he thought about the meal．Harris said he thought it would be all right to put the rat in．However， George did not want to try anything new．
　　It was a very good meal． It was different from other meals．The potatoes were a bit hard， but we had good teeth， so it did not really matter．
　　After supper Harris was rather disagreeable—I think it was the meal which caused this．He is not used to such rich food．George and I decided to go for a walk in Henley， but we left Harris in the boat．He said he was going to have a glass of whisky，smoke his pipe， and then get the boat ready for the night．We were on an island，so when we came back we would shout from the river bank．Then Harris would come in the boat and get us．When we left， we said to him，'Don't go to sleep！'
　　Henley was very busy， and we met quite a lot of people we knew in town．The time passed very quickly．When we started off on our long walk back， it was eleven o'clock．
　　It was a dark and miserable night．It was quite cold， and it was raining a bit． We walked through the dark， silent fields，and we talked quietly to each other．We wondered if we were going the right way．We thought of our nice， warm， comfort－able boat． We thought of Harris， and Montmorency， and the whisky—and we wished that we were there．
　　We imagined that we were inside our warm little boat， tired and a little hungry， with the dark， miserable river outside．We could see ourselves-we were sitting down to supper there； we were passing cold meat and thick pieces of bread to each other．We could hear the happy sounds of our knives and our laughing voices．We hurried to make it real．
　　After some time，we found the river，and that made us happy． We knew that we were going the right way． We passed Shiplake at a quarter to twelve， and then George said， quite slowly．' You don't remember which island it was， do you？'
　　' No，I don't，'I replied， and I began to think carefully．'How many are there？'
　　'Only four，'George answered．'It'll be all right，if Harris is awake．'
　　'And if he isn't awake？'I asked．
　　But we decided not to think about that．
　　When we arrived opposite the first island， we shouted， but there was no answer．So we went to the second island， and we tried there．The result was the same．
　　'Oh， I remember now，'George said．'It was the third one．'
　　And， full of hope， we ran to the third one， and we called out．There was no answer．
　　It was now becoming serious． It was after midnight．The ho－tels were all full，and we could not go round all the houses and knock on doors at midnight！George said that perhaps we could go back to Henley，find a policeman and hit him．He would arrest us and take us to a police station， and then we would have somewhere to sleep． But then we thought， 'Per－haps he won't arrest us．Perhaps he'll just hit us，too！'We could not fight policemen all night．
　　We tried the fourth island，but there was still no reply． It was raining hard now， and it was not going to stop． We were very cold， and wet， and miserable． We began to wonder if there were only four islands， or if we were on the wrong bit of the river．Everything looked strange and different in the darkness．
　　Just when we had lost all hope， I suddenly saw a strange light． It was over by the trees， on the opposite side of the river．I shouted as loudly as I could．
　　We waited in silence for a moment， and then（Oh， how happy we were！）we heard Montmorency bark．
　　We continued to shout for about five minutes， and then we saw the lights of the boat． It was coming towards us slowly．We heard Harris's sleepy voice． He was asking where we were．
　　Harris seemed very strange． It was more than tiredness． He brought the boat to our side of the river． He stopped， at a place where we could not get into the boat， and then immediately he fell asleep．
　　We had to scream and yell to wake him up again．At last we did wake him up， and we got into the boat．
　　Harris looked very sad．In fact，he looked like a man who had had a lot of trouble．We asked him if anything had hap－pened， and he said，' Swans！'
　　We had left the boat near a swan's nest， and， soon after George and I had left， Mrs Swan came back． She started to shout at Harris． However， Harris managed to chase her away，and she went to fetch her husband．Harris said he had had quite a hard battle with these two swans． But he had fought bravely and，in the end，he defeated them．
　　Half an hour later they returned-with eighteen more swans．There was another terrible battle．Harris said the swans had tried to pull him and Montmorency from the boat and drown them．But，once again，Harris fought bravely，for four hours，and he had killed them all．Then they had all swum away to die．
　　'How many swans did you say there were？'George asked．
　　'Thirty－two，'Harris replied，sleepily．
　　'You said eighteen before，'George said．
　　'No， I didn't，'Harris answered．'I said twelve．Do you think I can't count？'
　　We never discovered what had really happened．We asked Harris about it the next morning， but he said， 'What swans？'And he seemed to think that George and I had been dreaming．
　　Oh， how wonderful it was to be in the boat again！ We ate a very good supper， and then we thought we would have some whisky．But we could not find it．We asked Harris what he had done with it， but he did not seem to understand． The expres－sion on Montmorency's face told us that he knew something，but he said nothing．
　　I slept well that night，although Harris did wake me up ten times or more． He was looking for his clothes． He seemed to be worrying about his clothes all night．
　　Twice he made George and me get up，because he wanted to see if we were lying on his trousers．George got quite angry the second time．
　　'Whatever do you want your trousers for？ It's the middle of the night！'he cried．'Why don't you lie down and go to sleep？'
　　The next time I woke up Harris said he could not find his shoes．And I can remember that once he pushed me over onto my side．'Wherever can that umbrella be？'he was saying．






■ Chapter 14 Work， washing， and fishing
　　We woke up late the next morning， and it was about ten o'clock when we moved off． We had already decided that we wanted to make this a good day's journey．
　　We agreed that we would row， and not tow， the boat． Harris said that George and I should row，and he would steer．I did not like this idea at all．I said that he and George should row，so that I could rest a little．I thought that I was doing too much of the work on this trip． I was beginning to feel strongly about it．
　　I always think that I am doing too much work． It is not be－cause I do not like work． I do like it． I find it very interesting．I can sit and look at it for hours． You cannot give me too much work．I like to collect it．My study is full of it．
　　And I am very careful with my work， too．Why，some of the work in my study has been there for years， and it has not got dirty or anything．That is because I take care of it．
　　However，although I love work， I do not want to take other poople's work from them But I get it without asking for it，and this worries me．
　　George says that I should not worry about it． In fact， he thinks that perhaps I should have more work．However， I ex－pect he only says that to make me feel better．
　　In a boat， I have noticed that each person thinks that he is doing all the work． Harris's idea was that both George and I had let him do all the work． George said that Harris never did anything except eat and sleep． He， George， had done all the work．He said that he had never met such lazy people as Harris and me．
　　That amused Harris．
　　'George！ Work！'he laughed．'If George worked for half an hour， it would kill him． Have you ever seen George work？'he added， and he turned to me．
　　I agreed with Harris that I had never seen George work．
　　'Well，how can you know？'George answered Harris．
　　'You're always asleep． Have you ever seen Harris awake， ex-cept at meal times？'George asked me．
　　I had to tell the truth and agree with George．Harris had done very little work in the boat．
　　'Oh， come on！ I've done more than old J．， anyway，'Harris replied．
　　'Well，it would be difficult to do less，'George added．
　　'Oh，him，he thinks he's a passenger and doesn't need to work！'Harris said．
　　And that was how grateful they were to me， after I had brought them and their old boat all the way up from Kingston；after I had organized everything for them；and after I had tak－en care of them！
　　Finally， we decided that Harris and George would row until we got past Reading， and then I would tow the boat from there．
　　We reached Reading at about eleven o'clock． We did not stay long， though， because the river is dirty there．However， af－ter that it becomes very beautiful．Goring， on the left， and Streatley，on the right，are both very pretty places．Earlier，we had decided to go on to Wallingford that day， but the river was lovely at Streatley．We left our boat at the bridge，and we went into the village．we had lunch at a little pub，and Montmorency enjoyed that．
　　We stayed at Streatley for two days， and we took our clothes to be washed．We had tried to wash them ourselves， in the river，and George had told us what to do．This was not a suc－cess！ Before we washed them， they were very，very dirty，but we could just wear them． After we had washed them， they were worse than before．However，the river between Reading and Henley was cleaner because we had taken all the dirt from it， and we had washed it into our clothes． The woman who washed them at Streatley made us pay three times the usual price．
　　We paid her， and did not say a word about the cost．
　　The river near Streatley and Goring is excellent for fishing．You can sit and fish there all day．
　　Some people do sit and fish all day．They never catch any fish， of course． You may catch a dead cat or two， but you will not catch any fish． When you go for a walk by the river， the fish come and stand half out of the water， with their mouths open for bread．And if you go swimming， they all come and stare at you and get in your way．But you cannot catch them．
　　On the second evening， George and I and Montmorency（ I do not know where Harris was） went for a walk to Walling－ford．On the way back to the boat， we stopped at a little pub，by the river．
　　We went in and sat down．There was an old man there．He was smoking a pipe， and we began to talk to him．
　　He told us that it had been a fine day today， and we told him that it had been a fine day yesterday．Then we all told each other that we thought it would be a fine day tomorrow．
　　We told him that we were on holiday on the river，and that we were going to leave the next day． Then we stopped talking for a few minutes， and we began to look round the room． We noticed a glass case on the wall． In it there was a very big fish．
　　The old man saw that we were looking at this fish．
　　'Ah，'he said，' that's a big fish， isn't it？'
　　'Yes， it is，'I replied．
　　'Yes，'the old man continued，'it was sixteen years ago． I caught him just by the bridge．'
　　'Did you，really？'George asked．
　　'Yes，'the man answered．'They told me he was in the river． I said I'd catch him， and I did． You don't see many fish as big as that one now． Well， good night， then．'And he went out．
　　After that，we could not take our eyes off the fish． It really was a fine fish．We were still looking at it when another man came in．He had a glass of beer in his hand，and he also looked at the fish．
　　'That's a fine， big fish， isn't it？'George said to him．
　　'Ah，yes，'the man replied．He drank some of his beer，and then he added，'Perhaps you weren't here when it was caught？'
　　'No，'we said，and we explained that we did not live there．We said that we were only there on holiday．
　　'Ah， well，'the man went on，'it was nearly five years ago that I caught that fish．'
　　'Oh，did you catch it then？'I asked．
　　'Yes，'he replied．'I caught him by the lock…Well，good-night to you．'
　　Five minutes later a third man came in and described how he had caught the fish， early one morning． He left， and another man came in and sat down by the window．
　　Nobody spoke for some time．Then George turned to the man and said，'Excuse me，I hope you don't mind， but my friend and I， who are only on holiday here， would like to ask you a question．Could you tell us how you caught that fish？'
　　'Who told you that I caught that fish？'he asked．
　　We said that nobody had told us．We just felt that he was the man who had caught it．
　　'Well， that's very strange，'he answered， with a little laugh．' You're right． I did catch it．'And he went on to tell us how he had done it，and that it had taken him half an hour to land it．
　　When he left， the landlord came in to talk to us．We told him the different stories we had heard about his fish．He was very amused and we all laughed about it．And then he told us the re－al story of the fish．
　　He said that he had caught it himself， years ago， when he was a boy．It was a lovely，sunny afternoon，and instead of go－ing to school， he went fishing． That was when he caught the fish． Everyone thought he was very clever． Even his teacher thought he had done well and did not punish him．
　　He had to go out of the room just then， and we turned to look at the fish again． George became very excited about it， and he climbed up onto a chair to see it better．
　　And then George fell，and he caught hold of the glass case to save himself．It came down， with George and the chair on top of it．
　　'Is the fish all right？'I cried．
　　'I hope so， 'George said． He stood up carefully and looked round．But the fish was lying on the floor-in a thousand pieces！
　　It was not a real fish．






■ Chapter15 On to Oxford
　　We left Streatley early the next morning．We were going to Culham， and we wanted to spend the night there．Between Streatley and Walling ford the river is not very inter－esting．Then from Cleeve there is quite a long piece of the river which has no locks． Most people are pleased about this because it makes everything much easier，but I quite like locks，myself． I remember that George and I nearly had an accident in a lock once…
　　It was a lovely day， and there were a lot of boats in the lock．Someone was taking a photograph of us all， and the photographer was hoping to sell the picture to the people in the lock．I did not see the photographer at first， but suddenly George started to brush his trousers，and he fixed his hair and put on his hat． Then he sat down with a kind，but sad，expression on his face，and he tried to hide his feet．
　　My first idea was that he had seen a girl that he knew，and I looked round to see who it was．Everybody in the lock had stopped moving and they all had fixed expressions on their faces．All the girls were smiling prettily，and all the men were trying to look brave and handsome．
　　Then I saw the photographer and at once I understood．I wondered if I would be in time．Our boat was the first one in the lock， so I must look nice for the man's photograph．
　　So I turned round quickly and stood in the front of the boat．I arranged my hair carefully，and I tried to make myself look strong and interesting．
　　We stood and waited for the important moment when the man would actually take the photograph．Just then，someone behind me called out，'Hi！ Look at your nose！'
　　I could not turn round to see whose nose it was，but I had a quick look at George's nose．It seemed to be all right．I tried to look at my own nose，and that seemed to be all right，too．
　　'Look at your nose，you stupid fool！'the voice cried again， more loudly this time．
　　And then another voice called，'Push your nose out！You two，with the dog！'
　　We could not turn round because the man was just going to take the photograph．Was it us they were calling to？What was the matter with our noses？Why did they want us to push them out？
　　But now everybody in the lock started shouting， and a very loud， deep voice from the back called，'Look at your boat！You，in the red and black caps！If you don't do something quickly， there'll be two dead bodies in that photograph！'
　　We looked then， and we saw that the nose of our boat was caught in the wooden gate at the front of the lock．The water was rising， and our boat was beginning to turn over．Quickly，we pushed hard against the side of the lock， to move the boat．The boat did move， and George and I fell over on our backs．
　　We did not come out well in that photograph because the man took it just as we fell over．We had expressions of' Where am I？'and' What's happened？'on our faces，and we were waving our feet about wildly． In fact， our feet nearly filled the photograph． You could not see much else．
　　Nobody bought the photographs． They said they did not want photographs of our feet．The photographer was not very pleased…
　　We passed Wallingford and Dorchester，and we spent the night at Clifton Hampden，which is a very pretty little village．
　　The next morning we were up early，because we wanted to be in Oxford by the afternonn．By half past eight we had fin－ished breakfast and we were through Clifton lock．At half past twelve we went through Iffley lock．
　　From there to Oxford is the most difficult part of the river．First the river carries you to the right，then to the left；then it takes you out into the middle and turns you round three times．We got in the way of a lot of other boats；a lot of other boats got in our way-and a lot of bad words were used．
　　However，at Oxford we had two good days．There are a lot of dogs in the town． Montmorency had eleven fights on the first day and fourteen on the second．This made him very happy．
　　If you are thinking of taking a trip on the river， and you are going to start from Oxford， take your own boat（unless you can take someone else's without being discovered）． The boats that you can hire on the Thames above Marlow are all right： they do not let too much water in， and they have seats and things． But they are not really boats which you want people to see．The person who hires one of these boats is the kind of person who likes to stay under the trees．He likes to travel early in the morning or late at night， when there are not many people about to look at him．When he sees someone he knows， he gets out of the boat and hides behind a tree．I remember that some friends and I hired one of these boats one summer…
　　We had written to ask for a boat， and， when we arrived at the boathouse， we gave our names．The man said，'Oh，yes．'And then he called out to another man，'Jim，fetch “The Queen of the Thames”．'
　　Five minutes later，Jim came back with a very old piece of wood． He had clearly just dug it up from a hole in the ground． When he dug it up， he had damaged it very badly．
　　We asked Jim what it was．
　　'It's“The Queen of the Thames”，'he answered．
　　We laughed at this，and then one of us said，'All right．Now go and fetch the real boat．'
　　They said that this was the real boat…






■ Chapter16 The journey home
　　We left Oxford on the third day， to go back home．The weather changed， and， when we left Oxford， it was raining．It continued to rain，not heavily，but all the time．
　　When the sun is shining，the river turns everything into a golden dream． But when it rains， the river is brown and miser-able．
　　It rained all day，and，at first，we pretended we were enjoy－ing it．We said that it was a nice change．We added that it was good to see the river in all kinds of weather．Harris and I sang a song about how good it was to be free and to be able to enjoy the sun and the rain．
　　George thought it was much more serious， and he put up the umbrella．
　　Before lunch， he put the cover on the boat， and it stayed there all afternoon． We just left a little hole， so that we could see out． We stopped for the night， just before Day's lock， and I cannot say that we spent a happy evening．
　　The rain came down without stopping．Everything in the boat was wet．Supper was not a success．We were all tired of cold meat， and we talked about our favourite foods．When we passed the cold meat to Montmorency， he refused our offer．He went and sat at the other end of the boat， alone．
　　We played cards after supper．We played for about an hour and a half， and George won ten pence． Harris and I lost five pence each．We decided to stop then， because the game was getting too exciting．
　　After that we had some whisky，and we sat and talked．George told us about a man he had known．This man had slept on the river， in a wet boat， like ours， and it had made him very ill． Ten days later， the poor man died， in great pain．George said he was quite a young man， so it was very sad．
　　Then Harris remembered one of his friends who had camped out on a wet night．When he woke up the next morning，he was in great pain， and he was never able to walk again．
　　So then，of course， we began to talk about other illnesses．Harris said it would be very serious if one of us became ill be－cause we were a long way from a doctor．
　　After this we really needed something to make us feel a bit happier， so George sang to us． That really made us cry．
　　After that we could think of nothing else to do， so we went to bed．Well…we undressed and we lay down in the boat．We tried to go to sleep but it was four hours before we did so．At five o'clock we all woke up again， so we got up and had break-fast．
　　The second day was the same as the first． It rained all day．We sat in our raincoats under the cover， and we travelled slow-ly along the river． I did try to sing again， but it was not a suc-cess．
　　However， we all agreed that we should continue our trip．We had come to enjoy ourselves for a fortnight on the river， and we were going to finish the trip． If it killed us-well， that would be a sad thing for our friends and families， but we would not give in to the weather．
　　'It's only two more days，'Harris said， 'and we are young and strong．Perhaps we'll be all right．'
　　At about four o'clock we began to discuss our plans for that evening． We were a little past Goring then， and we decided to go on to Pangbourne and spend the night there．
　　'Another happy evening，'George said．
　　We sat and thought about it．We would be in Pangbourne by five o'clock． We would finish our dinner by half past six． After that we could walk about the village in the rain，or we could sit in a dark little pub．
　　'It would be more interesting to go to the Alhambra Theatre in London，'Harris said，and he looked out at the sky．
　　'With supper afterwards at that little French restaurant，'I added．
　　'Yes， I'm almost sorry we've decided to stay on the boat，'Harris said．Then we were silent for a time．
　　'I know we've decided to stay and die on this boat，'George said，'but there is a train which leaves Pangbourne soon after five o'clock． We could be in London in time to get something to eat，and afterwards we could go on to the theatre．'
　　Nobody said a word． We looked at each other， and we all felt badly about it． We did not speak， but we got out the bag．We looked up the river， and down the river． There was nobody there．
　　Twenty minutes later， three figures and an ashamed dog qui－etly left the nearest boathouse， and went towards the station．
　　We had told the boatman a lie．We had asked him to take care of the boat for us until nine o'clock the next morning． We said we would come back for it then． However， if（ only' if'）something happened to stop us from coming back， then we would write to him．
　　We reached Paddington station at seven o'clock， and we drove straight to the restaurant．We had a light meal and left Montmorency there． Then we went to the theatre． For some reason everybody stared at us， and this made us very happy．Perhaps it was because of our interesting clothes， or because we looked so healthy．
　　Afterwards we went back to the restaurant， where supper was waiting for us．
　　We really did enjoy that supper．For ten days we had lived on cold meat and bread， and not much else． We ate and drank without speaking，and then we sat back and rested．We felt good，and thoughtful，and kind．
　　Then Harris，who was sitting next to the window，pulled back the curtain and looked out into the street． It was still raining， and it was dark and very wet． One or two people hur-ried past． The rain was running from their umbrellas， and the women were holding up their long skirts．
　　Harris picked up his glass．
　　'Well，'he said，' we've had a good trip， and I'm very grate－ful to Old Father Thames．But I think we were right to give up and come back． Here's to Three Men well out of a Boat！'
　　And Montmorency stood on his back legs in front of the window， looked out into the night， and gave a short bark to show that he agreed．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　The Thirty Nine Steps by John Buchan





■ 1 The man who died
　　I returned to my flat at about three o'clock on that May afternoon very unhappy with life. I has been back in Britain for three months and I was already bored. The weather was bad，the people were dull，and the amusements of London seemed as exciting as a glass of cold water.'Richard Hannay，'I told myself，'you have made a mistake，and you had better do something about it.'
　　It made me angry when I thought of the years I had spent in Africa. I had spent those years working very hard and making money. Not a lot of money，but enough for me. I had left Scotland when I was six years old，and I had never been home since. For years I had dreamt of coming home to Britain and spending the rest of my life there，but I was disappointed with the place after the first week. And so here I was，thirty-seven years old，healthy，with enough money to have a good time，and bored to death.
　　That evening I went out to dinner and sat reading the newspapers afterwards. They were full of the troubles in south-east Europe，and there was a long report about Karolides，the Greek Prime Minister. He seemed to be an honest man，but some people in Europe hated him. However，many people in Britain liked him，and one newspaper said that he was the only man who could prevent a war starting. I remember wondering if I could get a job in south-east Europe；it might be a lot less boring than life in London.
　　As I walked home that night，I decided to give Britain one more day. If nothing interesting happened，I would take the next boat back to Africa.
　　My flat was in a big new building in Langham Place. There was a doorman at the entrance to the building，but each flat was separate，with its own front door. I was just putting the key into my door when a man appeared next to me. He was thin，with a short brown beard and small，very bright eyes. I recognized him as the man who lived in a flat on the top floor of the building. We had spoken once or twice on the stairs.
　　'Can I speak to you？'he asked. 'May I come in for a minute？'His voice was shaking a little.
　　I opened the door and we went in.
　　'Is the door locked？'he asked，and quickly locked it himself.
　　'I'm very sorry，'he said to me. 'It's very rude of me. But I'm in a dangerous corner and you looked like the kind of man who would understand. If I explain，will you help me？'
　　'I'll listen to you，'I said. 'That's all I promise. 'I was getting worried by this strange man's behaviour.
　　There was a table with drinks on it next to him，and he took a large whisky for himself. He drank it quickly，and then put the glass down so violently that it broke.
　　'I'm sorry，'he said. 'I'm a little nervous tonight. You see，at this moment I'm dead. '
　　I sat down in an armchair and lit my pipe.
　　'How does it feel？'I asked. I was now almost sure that the man was mad.
　　He smiled. 'I'm not mad-yet. Listen，I've been watching you，and I guess that you're not easily frightened. I'm going to tell you my story. I need help very badly，and I want to know if you're the right man to ask. '
　　'Tell me your story，'I said，'and I'll tell you if I can help you. '
　　It was an extraordinary story. I didn't understand all of it，and I had to ask a lot of questions，but here it is：
　　His name was Franklin P. Scudder and he was an American，but he had been in south-east Europe for several years. By accident，he had discovered a group of people who were working secretly to push Europe towards a war. These people were clever，and dangerous. Some of them wanted to change the world through war；others simply wanted to make a lot of money，and there is always money to be made from a war. Their plan was to get Russia and Germany at war with each other.
　　'I want to stop them，'Scudder told me，'and if I can stay alive for another month，I think I can. '
　　'I thought you were already dead，'I said.
　　'I'll tell you about that in a minute，'he answered. 'But first，do you know who Constantine Karolides is？'
　　'The Greek Prime Minister. I've just been reading about him in today's newspapers. '
　　'Right. He's the only man who can stop the war. He's intelligent，he's honest，and he knows what's going on-and so his enemies plan to kill him. I have discovered how. That was very dangerous for me，so I had to disappear. They can't kill Karolides in Greece because he has too many guards. But on the 15th of June he's coming to London for a big meeting，and his enemies plan to kill him here. '
　　'You can warn him，'I said. 'He'll stay at home. '
　　'That's what his enemies want. If he doesn't come，they'll win，because he's the only man who understands the whole problem and who can stop the war happening. '
　　'Why don't you go to the British police？'I said.
　　'No good. They could bring in five hundred policemen，but they wouldn't stop the murder. The murderer will be caught，and he'll talk and put the blame on the governments in Vienna and Berlin. It will all be lies，of course，but everybody will be ready to believe it. But none of this will happen if Franklin P. Scudder is here in London on the 15th of June. '
　　I was beginning to like this strange little man. I gave him another whisky and asked him why he thought that he was now in danger himself.
　　He took a large mouthful of whisky. 'I came to London by a strange route-through Paris，Hamburg，Norway，and Scotland. I changed my name in every country，and when I got to London，I thought I was safe. But yesterday I realized that they're still following me. There's a man watching this building and last night somebody put a card under my door. On it was the name of the man I fear most in the world.
　　'So I decided I had to die. Then they would stop looking for me. I got a dead body-it's easy to get one in London，if you know how-and I had the body brought to my flat in a large suitcase. The body was the right age，but the face was different from mine. I dressed it in my clothes and shot it in the face with my own gun. My servant will find me when he arrives in the morning and he'll call the police. I've left a lot of empty whisky bottles in my room. The police will think I drank too much and then killed myself. 'He paused. 'I watched from the window until I saw you come home，and then came down the stairs to meet you. '
　　It was the strangest of stories. However，in my experience，the most extraordinary stories are often the true ones. And if the man just wanted to get into my flat and murder me，why didn't he tell a simpler story？
　　'Right，'I said. 'I'll trust you for tonight. I'll lock you in this room and keep the key. Just one word，Mr Scudder. I believe you're honest，but if you're not，I should warn you that I know how to use a gun. '
　　'Certainly，'he answered，jumping up. 'I'm afraid I don't know your name，sir，but I would like to thank you. And could I use your bathroom？'
　　When I next saw him，half an hour later，I didn't recognize him at first. Only the bright eyes were the same. His beard was gone，and his hair was completely different. He walked like a soldier，and he was wearing glasses. And he no longer spoke like an American.
　　'Mr Scudder—'I cried.
　　'Not Mr Scudder，'he answered. 'Captain Theophilus Digby of the British Army. Please remember that. '
　　I made him a bed in my study，and then went to bed myself，happier than I had been for the past month. Interesting things did happen sometimes，even in London.
　　* * *
　　The next morning when my servant Paddock arrived，I introduced him to Captain Digby. I explained that the Captain was an important man in the army，but he had been working too hard and needed rest and quiet. Then I went out，leaving them both in the flat. When I returned at about lunchtime，the doorman told me that the gentleman in flat 15 had killed himself. I went up to the top floor，had a few words with the police，and was able to report to Scudder that his plan had been successful. The police believed that the dead man was Scudder，and that he had killed himself. Scudder was very pleased.
　　For the first two days in my flat，he was very calm，and spent all his time reading and smoking，and writing in a little black notebook. But after that he became more restless and nervous. It was not his own danger that he worried about，but the success of his plan to prevent the murder of Karolides. One night he was very serious.
　　'Listen，Hannay，'he said. 'I think I must tell you some more about this business. I would hate to get killed without leaving someone else to carry on with my plan. '
　　I didn't listen very carefully. I was interested in Scudder's adventures，but I wasn't very interested in politics. I remember that he said Karolides was only in danger in London. He also mentioned a woman called Julia Czechenyi. He talked about a Black Stone and a man who lisped when he spoke. And he described another man，perhaps the most dangerous of them all-an old man with a young voice who could hood his eyes like a hawk.
　　The next evening I had to go out. I was meeting a man I had known in Africa for dinner. When I returned to the flat，I was surprised to see that the light in the study was out. I wondered if Scudder had gone to bed early. I turned on the light，but there was nobody there. Then I saw something in the corner that made my blood turn cold.
　　Scudder was lying on his back. There was a long knife through his heart，pinning him to the floor.






■ 2 The milkman starts his travels
　　I sat down in an armchair and felt very sick. After about five minutes I started shaking. The poor white face with its staring eyes was too much for me，so I got a tablecloth and covered it. Then I took the whisky bottle and drank several mouthfuls. I had seen men die violently before. I had killed a few myself in the Matabele war；but this was different. After a few more minutes I managed to calm myself down a little. I looked at my watch and saw that it was halfpast ten. I searched the flat carefully，but there was nobody there. Then I locked the doors and windows.
　　By this time I was beginning to think more clearly. It looked bad for me-that was clear. It was now certain that Scudder's story was true-the proof was lying under the tablecloth. His enemies had found him and made sure of his silence. But he had been in my flat for four days，and they must think he had told his story to me. So I would be the next to die. It might be that night，or the next day，or the day after，but it was sure to happen.
　　Then I thought of another problem. I could call the police now，or go to bed and wait for Paddock to discover the body and call them in the morning. But what would the police think？What story would I tell them about Scudder？I had lied to Paddock about him，and my story would be hard to believe. They would arrest me for murder，and I had no real friends in England to help me. Perhaps that was part of the plan. An English prison would be a safe place for me until the 15th of June.
　　Even if the police did believe my story，I would still be helping Scudder's enemies. Karolides would stay at home，which was what they wanted. Scudder's death had made me certain that his story was true；now I felt responsible for continuing his work. I hate to see a good man beaten，and if I carried on in Scudder's place，the murderers might not win.
　　I decided I must disappear，and remain hidden until just before the 15th of June. Then I must contact some government people and tell them Scudder's story. I wished he had told me more，and that I had listened more carefully to what he had told me. There was a risk that the government would not believe me，but it was my best chance. Perhaps more evidence would appear which would help me to make my story believable.
　　It was now the 24th of May，so I had twenty days of hiding. Two groups of people would be looking for meScudder's enemies，who would want to kill me，and the police，who would want me for Scudder's murder. There was going to be a chase，and，surprisingly，I was almost happy about this. I did not want to sit in one place and wait. If I could move，the situation did not seem so bad.
　　I wondered if Scudder had any papers which would give me more information about his business. I lifted off the table-cloth and searched him. There were only a few coins in his trouser pockets. There was no sign of the little black notebook. I supposed his murderer had taken that.
　　When I turned from the body，I noticed that all the cupboards were open. Scudder had been a very careful man，and always kept the place tidy. Someone had been searching for something，and perhaps for the notebook. I went round the flat and found that everything had been searched-the insides of books，cupboards，boxes，even the pockets of my clothes. There was no sign of the notebook，so Scudder's enemies had probably found it in the end.
　　Then I got out a map of Britain. My plan was to find some wild country. I was used to Africa，and I would feel trapped in the city. I thought Scotland would probably be best，because my family came from Scotland and I could pretend to be a Scotsman easily. The other possibility was to be a German tourist；my father had worked with Germans and I had spoken German often as a boy. But it would probably be better to be a Scotsman in Scotland. I decided to go to Galloway，which，from the map，seemed to be the nearest wild part of Scotland.
　　In the railway timetable I found a train from London at seven-ten in the morning，which would get me to Galloway in the late afternoon. The problem was getting to the station，as I was certain that Scudder's enemies were watching the building. I thought about this problem，had a good idea，went to bed，and slept for two hours.
　　I got up at four o'clock. The first light of a summer morning was in the sky and the birds were starting to sing. I put on some old clothes which I used for country walking and some strong walking boots. I pushed another shirt and a toothbrush into my pockets. I had taken a lot of money out of the bank in case Scudder needed it，so I took that as well. Then I cut my long moustache as short as possible.
　　Paddock arrived every morning at seven-thirty. But at about twenty to seven I knew the milkman would come；the noise of the milk bottles usually woke me up. He was a young man with a very short moustache，and he wore a white coat. He was my only chance.
　　I had a breakfast of biscuits and whisky and by the time I had finished it was about six o'clock. I got my pipe and started to fill it from my tobacco jar. As I put my fingers into the tobacco，I touched something hard，and pulled out Scudder's little black book.
　　This seemed a good sign. I lifted the cloth and looked at Scudder's peaceful face. 'Goodbye，my friend，'I said；'I'm going to do my best for you. Wish me good luck. '
　　Six-thirty passed，then six-forty，but still the milkman did not come. Why，oh why，was this the morning he had to be late？
　　At fourteen minutes to seven I heard him. I opened the door quickly，and he jumped a bit when he saw me.
　　'Come in a moment，'I said，and we went back into the hall. 'I can see you're a man who likes a bit of fun. Can you help me？Lend me your hat and coat for a minute and you can have this. '
　　He looked at the money in my hand and smiled. 'What do you want my clothes for？'he asked.
　　'It's a game，'I said. 'I haven't time to explain now，but to win I've got to be a milkman for ten minutes. You'll be a bit late，but you'll get the money for your time. '
　　'All right！'he said. 'I like a game myself. Here you are. '
　　I put on his blue hat and white coat，picked up the empty milk bottles，shut my door and went downstairs，whistling.
　　At first I thought the street was empty. Then I saw a man walking slowly towards me. As he passed，he looked up at a window in the house opposite，and I saw a face look back at him.
　　I crossed the street，still whistling，and then turned down a little side street. As I dropped the hat，coat and milk bottles behind a wall，I heard a church clock；it was seven o'clock.
　　I ran to the station as fast as I could. It was just ten past seven when I reached the platform. I had no time to buy a ticket；the train was already moving. I jumped into the last carriage.






■ 3 The hotel-owner
　　It was fine May weather as I travelled north that day，and as I watched the fields and the trees and the flowers，I wondered why，when I had been a free man，I had stayed in London. I bought some sandwiches at lunch time. I also bought the morning newspaper and read a little about south-east Europe.
　　When I had finished，I got out Scudder's black book and studied it. It was almost full of writing，mostly numbers，although sometimes there was a name. For example，I found the words'Hofgaard'，'Luneville'，and'Avocado'quite often. The word I saw the most was'Pavia'.
　　I was certain that Scudder was using a code. I have always been interested in codes；I enjoy games and numbers and things like that. It seemed to be a number code，where groups of numbers replace letters. I worked on the words，because you can use a word as a key in a number code.
　　I tried for hours，but none of the words helped. Then I fell asleep，and woke up at Dumfries just in time to take the local train into Galloway. There was a man on the platform who worried me a little；he was watching the crowd more closely than I liked. But he didn't look at me，and when I saw myself in a mirror，I understood why；with my brown face and my old clothes I looked just like all the other hill farmers who were getting into the local train.
　　I travelled with a group of these farmers. The train travelled slowly through narrow valleys and then up onto an open moor. There were lakes，and in the distance I could see high mountains.
　　At five o'clock the carriage was empty and I was alone. I got out at the next station，a tiny place in the middle of the moor. An old man was digging in the station garden. He stopped，walked to the train，collected a packet，and went back to his potatoes. A ten-year-old child took my ticket，and I came out of the station onto a white road across the moor.
　　It was a beautiful，clear spring evening. I felt like a boy on a walking holiday，instead of a man of thirty-seven very much wanted by the police. I walked along the road whistling，feeling happier every minute.
　　After some time I left the road and followed a path along a little stream. I was getting tired when I came to a small house. The woman who lived there was friendly，and said I could sleep there. She also gave me an excellent meal.
　　Her husband came home from the hills later in the evening. We talked about cows and sheep and markets，and I tried to remember some of the information I heard，because it might be useful. By ten o'clock I was asleep，and I slept until five o'clock in the morning.
　　The couple refused any money，and by six o'clock I had eaten breakfast and was moving again. I wanted to get back to the railway at a different station. Then I would go back to the east，towards Dumfries. I hoped that if the police were following me，they would think that I had gone on to the coast in the west，where I could escape by ship.
　　I walked in the same beautiful spring weather as before，and still couldn't make myself feel nervous or worried. After a time I came to the railway line，and soon a little station，which was perfect for my plan. There was just a single line and moors all around. I waited until I saw a train in the distance，and then bought a ticket to Dumfries.
　　The only person in the carriage was an old farmer with his sheepdog. He was asleep，and next to him was a newspaper. I picked it up to see if there was any news about me. There was only a short piece about the Langham Place Murder. My servant Paddock had called the police，and the milkman had been arrested. The poor man had spent most of the day with the police，but they had let him go in the evening. The police believed that the real murderer had escaped from London on a train to the north.
　　When I had finished reading，I looked out of the window and noticed that we were stopping at the station where I had got out yesterday. Three men were talking to the man who I had seen digging potatoes. I sat well back from the window and watched carefully. One of the men was taking notes，and I supposed they were from the local police. Then，I saw the child who had taken my ticket talking，and the men looked out across the moor along that road I had taken.
　　As we left the station，the farmer woke up，looked at me，and asked where he was. He had clearly drunk too much.
　　'I'm like this because I never drink，'he said，sadly. 'I haven't touched whisky since last year. Not even at Christmas. And now I've got this terrible headache. '
　　'What did it？'I asked.
　　'A drink they call brandy. I didn't touch the whisky because I don't drink，but I kept drinking this brandy. I'll be ill for a fortnight. 'His voice got slower and slower and soon he fell asleep again.
　　I had planned to leave the train at a station，but it now stopped by a river and I decided this would be better. I looked out of the carriage window and saw nobody，so I opened the door and dropped quickly down into the long grass. My plan was going perfectly until the dog decided that I was stealing something and began to bark loudly. This woke up the farmer who started to shout. He thought I was trying to kill myself. I crawled through the long grass for about a hundred metres and then looked back. The train driver and several passengers were all staring in my direction.
　　Luckily，the dog was now so excited that he pulled the farmer out of the carriage. The farmer began to slide down towards the river. The otner passengers ran to help him，the dog bit somebody，and there was a lot of excited shouting. Soon they had forgotten me，and the next time I looked back，the train was moving again.
　　I was now in the middle of the empty moor，and for the first time I felt really frightened，not of the police but of the people who knew that I knew Scudder's secret. If they caught me，I would be a dead man.
　　I reached the top of a low hill and looked around. To the south，a long way away，I saw something which made me tremble…
　　Low in the sky a small plane was flying slowly across the moor. I was certain that it was looking for me，and I was also certain that it was not the police. I hid low in the heather and watched it for an hour or two as it flew in circles. Finally it disappeared to the south.
　　I did not like this spying from the air，and I began to think that an open moor was perhaps not the best place to hide. I could see distant forests in the east，and decided that would be better country.
　　It was about six o'clock in the evening when I left the moor and entered the trees. I came to a bridge by a house，and there，on the bridge，was a young man. He was sitting smoking a pipe，dreamily watching the water，and holding a book. He jumped up as he heard my feet on the road and I saw a friendly young face.
　　'Good evening to you，'he said in a serious voice. 'It's a fine night to be on the road. '
　　The smell of cooking came from the house.
　　'Is that house a hotel？'I asked.
　　'It certainly is. I'm the owner，and I hope you'll stay the night，because I've been alone for a week. '
　　I sat down next to him and got out my pipe. I began to think this young man might help me.
　　'You're young to own a hotel，'I said.
　　'My father died a year ago and now it's mine. It's not an exciting job for a young man like me. I didn't choose to do it. I want to write books. '
　　'You've got the right job，'I said. 'With all the travellers you meet you could be the best storyteller in the world. '
　　'Not today，'he said. 'Two hundred years ago，there were exciting people on the road，but today there are only cars full of fat old women，and fishermen. You can't make stories out of them. I want to sail up an African river，or live in an Indian village-and write about things like that. '
　　The hotel looked peaceful in the evening sun.
　　'I've travelled a bit，'I said，'and I'd be happy to live in a peaceful place like this. And perhaps you're sitting next to adventure now. I'll tell you a true story，and you can make a book of it if you like. '
　　I told him I was in the gold business in Africa，and I had discovered a group of international thieves. They had chased me to England and had killed my best friend. I described a chase across the desert，and an attack on the ship from Africa. And I described the Langham Place murder in detail. 'You want adventure，'I said，'well，here it is. The thieves are chasing me now，and the police are chasing them. '
　　'It's wonderful！'he whispered.
　　'You believe me，'I said gratefully.
　　'Of course I do，'he said. 'I can believe anything strange. It's things that happen every day that are difficult to believe. '
　　He was very young，but he was the man I needed.
　　'I think my enemies have lost me for the moment. But I must hide and rest for a day or two. Will you help me？'
　　He jumped up and led me to the house. 'You'll be safe here. I can keep a secret. And you'll tell me some more about your adventures，won't you？'
　　As I entered the hotel，I heard the sound of an engine. In the sky to the west was my enemy the plane.
　　He gave me a room at the back of the house. I asked him to watch out for cars and planes and sat down to work on Scudder's little book. As I have said，it was a number code. I had to find the word that was the key to it，and when I thought of the million words it might be，I felt hopeless. But the next afternoon I remembered that Scudder had said a woman called Julia Czechenyi was the key to the Karolides business，so I tried her name as the code key.
　　It was the answer. In half an hour I was reading，with a white face.
　　Suddenly，I heard the sound of a car stopping outside the hotel.
　　Ten minutes later，my young friend came up to my room，his eyes bright with excitement.
　　'There are two men looking for you，'he whispered. They're downstairs now having a drink. They described you very well. I told them you had stayed here last night and had left this morning. '
　　I asked him to describe them. One was a thin man with dark eyes，the other was always smiling and lisped. They were both English；my young friend was certain of this.
　　I took a piece of paper and wrote these words in German. I made it look like one page of a private letter：
　　…Black Stone. Scudder had discovered this，but he could do nothing for a fortnight. I don't think it's any good now because Karolides is uncertain about his plans. But if Mr T. advises，I will do the best I…
　　'Give this to them and say you found it in my bedroom. Ask them to return it to me if they find me. '
　　Three minutes later the car began to move. From behind the curtain I saw two men in it，one thin，one fatter.
　　The young man came back. He was very excited. 'That paper woke them up，'he said，happily. 'The thin man went white，and the fat one whistled. Then they left as quickly as they could. '
　　'Now I'll tell you what I want you to do，'I said. 'Go to the police station and describe the two men to them. Say you think they may have something to do with the London murder. I'm sure those two men will be back here tomorrow morning for more information about me. Tell the police to be here early. '
　　At about eight o'clock the next morning I watched three policemen arrive. They hid their car and came into the hotel. Twenty minutes later another car came towards the hotel，but stopped in some trees about two hundred metres away. The two men inside walked up to the hotel.
　　I had planned to hide in my bedroom and see what happened. But now I had a better idea. I wrote a note to thank the young man for his help，opened my window and dropped out. Watching the hotel carefully，I walked back towards the car in the trees，jumped in，and drove away.






■ 4 The political candidate
　　I drove that car across the moor as fast as I could，looking nervously over my shoulder. I was also thinking desperately about Scudder's notes.
　　Scudder had told me nothing but lies. All his stories about south-east Europe and people wanting to start wars were rubbish. But although he had told me lies，there was truth underneath.
　　The 15th of June was going to be an important day，but because of something more important than the murder of a Prime Minister. The story in his book was not complete，and there were some things I didn't understand-for example，the words 'thirty-nine steps'，which appeared five or six times. The last time the words were used，Scudder had written'Thirty-nine steps，I counted them-high tide at 10∶17 p. m. '
　　The first thing I learned was that war was certain. Everything was planned. Karolides was going to be murdered and nothing could prevent it.
　　The second thing I learned was that Britain was not prepared for war. Karolides would be murdered and war would seem certain. Germany would pretend to be against war，but while we and they discussed peace，their submarines would silently fill the seas around us.
　　There was something else. Although the newspapers didn't know it，the British and French governments were close allies，and had agreed to prepare for war together. The most important officers in the armies and navies met regularly，and in June one of the top people was coming from Paris for a meeting. He would be told the exact details of the British Navy's preparations for war.
　　But on the 15th of June other people were going to be in London. Scudder didn't give names，but called them just the 'Black Stone'. They had a plan to get hold of this information，which was meant only for the French Government. And the information would be used by our enemies just a week or two later，with a most terrible effect.
　　My first idea was to write a letter to the British Prime Minister. But nobody would believe my story. I had to find proof that Scudder's story was true；and this would not be easy with the police and the Black Stone following me.
　　I drove to the east through a country at peace；but I knew that in a month's time，unless I was very lucky，men would be lying dead in this quiet countryside. I came into a village and I saw a policeman standing outside the Post Office and reading something carefully. He looked up at the car，stepped into the road，and held up a hand to stop me.
　　I almost did stop. But then I realized that the policeman had been reading about me. I supposed the police at the hotel had worked quickly and contacted all the local villages. I drove faster，the policeman jumped out of my way，and I was soon out of the village.
　　I left the main road as soon as possible and tried a smaller one. It was not easy without a map，and I realized that I had been stupid to steal the car. It would help the police and the Black Stone to find me in any corner of Scotland. If I left it，and went off on foot，they would find me in an hour or two.
　　I took a road that went along a narrow valley，and then up onto the moor again. I was very hungry；I had eaten nothing since morning. And now，as I drove，I heard a noise in the sky，and there was the plane.
　　On the moor it would see me in a minute. I drove as fast as I could down into another valley and towards a wood. Suddenly，a car appeared in front of me from a side road. There was no time to stop. I did the only thing possible and drove off the road into a hedge，hoping to hit something soft beyond. But I was out of luck. The car went through the hedge like a knife through butter，and immediately began to fall. I jumped out and was caught by the branch of a tree，while the car disappeared into a river fifteen metres below.
　　* * *
　　A hand helped me out of the tree，and a frightened voice asked me if I was badly hurt. The speaker was a young man who was very alarmed and very sorry. I was more pleased than angry；it was a good way for the car to disappear.
　　'It's my fault，'I told him. 'That's the end of my holiday，but that's better than the end of my life！'
　　He looked at his watch. 'I'm in a hurry，but my house is very near. Let me give you some food and a bed. But what about your luggage？Is it in the river？'
　　'It's in my pocket，'I said. 'I'm from Australia，so I never carry much luggage. '
　　'From Australia，'he cried. 'You're just the man I need. '
　　We got into his car and in three minutes we were at his very comfortable house. He found some food for me. 'You've only got five minutes，I'm afraid，but you can eat properly after wards. We've got to be at the meeting at eight o'clock. You see，I'm a candidate for the election and I've got a problem tonight. I had arranged for Crumpleton，who was the Australian Prime Minister，to speak at the meeting tonight，but he's ill. I've got to speak for forty minutes，and I don't know what to say. Listen，My-you haven't told me your name-Twisdon，you say？Well，Mr Twisdon，can you talk about Australia for a few minutes？'
　　It seemed strange to ask a man you had met in a car crash to speak at an election meeting，but I needed his help.
　　'All right，'I said. 'I'm not a good speaker，but I'll speak for a bit. '
　　He was delighted. We got in his car，and on the way to the meeting he told me about his life. His name was Sir Harry Andrews and his uncle was in the government and had suggested politics as a job. He knew nothing about politics，but he was a friendly young man and I was glad to help him. When we arrived at the meeting，there were about five hundred people waiting. I was introduced as a'trusted Australian leader'and then Sir Harry started to speak. It was mostly about preparing for war. He said the Germans didn't want a war and that if we stopped building new warships， the Germans would do the same. I thought about Scudder's black book in my pocket.
　　But behind all the rubbish I could see that Sir Harry was a nice man. And he spoke very badly. I knew I wasn't a good speaker，but I would be better than him.
　　I simply told them everything I knew about Australia. I said that Britain and Australia must work together and be friends. I think I was rather a success.
　　When we were back in his car again， Sir Harry was delight－ed. 'You spoke wonderfully，Twisdon，'he said. 'Now you must stay for a few days. There's excellent fishing here. '
　　We had a good supper-which I needed-and sat in front of a fire in his sitting－room. I thought the time had come for me to tell the truth and see if this man could help me. 'Listen，Sir Harry，I've got something very important to say to you. You're an honest man，and I'm going to be honest too. Everything you said tonight was dangerous rubbish. ' 'Was it？I wasn't sure myself. Do you think Germany is going to start a war with us？'
　　'In six weeks' time you won't need to ask me that Listen， and I'll tell you a story. '
　　I sat in front of the fire，in that peaceful room，and told him everything. He heard about Scudder， his notebook， the milk－man， and my travels in Scotland. It was the first time I had told the truth，all of it， to anyone， and I felt better.
　　'So you see，' I said finally，'I'm the man the police want for the Langham Place murder. You should call them at once.
　　He looked at me carefully. 'I know you're not a murderer，Hannay， and I believe you're speaking the truth. I'll help you. What do you want me to do？'
　　'First，write to your uncle. I must contact the government before the 15th of June. '
　　He pulled his moustache. 'That won't help you. My uncle isn't interested in foreign politics， and I don't think he'd be－lieve you. No. I'll write to a friend of his，Sir Walter Bulli-vant， who works in the Foreign Office . He's an intelligent man and I think he'd help. What shall I say？'
　　So he wrote a letter to Sir Walter， saying that if a man named Twisdon came to him， he should help him. Twisdon would say the words 'Black Stone'and would whistle the song ' Annie Laurie'， to prove who he was.
　　He told me where Sir Walter lived， and asked me what more he could do.
　　'Can you lend me some old clothes and give me a map？ And if the police come， show them the car in the river. '
　　I then slept for three or four hours， until Sir Harry woke me at two o'clock. He gave me an old bicycle for the first part of the journey.






■ 5 The adventure of the roadman
　　I sat down at the top of a hill and rested. Behind me was a road climbing out of a river valley. In front were two kilometres of flat open country. To the left and the right were green hills. A kilometre down the road behind me I could see the smoke from a small house，but otherwise there was no sign of human life. There were only the sounds of birds singing and water flowing.
　　It was now about seven o'clock in the morning，and as I waited，I heard the sound of an engine in the air. I realized that I was in a bad position， because I had nowhere to hide.
　　I sat，hopelessly，as the aeroplane came nearer. It was high at first，but then it came down very low. I could see one of the two men looking at me very carefully. Then，suddenly，it went up and disappeared.
　　I had to think quickly. My enemies had found me， so now，I supposed，they would put a circle of men around the hills. They had probably seen my bicycle，so they would expect me to try and escape by road. I found a small lake about a hundred metres from the road and threw the bicycle in. Then I climbed to a higher bit of ground and looked around.
　　There was nowhere to hide. The moor was open，but to me it was like a prison. I started to walk to the north， and as Iwalked，I saw a car about fifteen kilometres away on the road. And， in the valley below me，I could see a line of men walking slowly upwards. The north was no good. I turned，and began to run southwards. I ran hard， watching the skyline in front of me， and soon I thought I could see distant figures on the hill. I turned again and ran down to the road.
　　If you have enemies all around you， the best plan is to hide while they search and do not find you. But there was nothing to hide in， nothing but the moor，the heather， and the white road.
　　* * *
　　Then，in a bend in the road，I found the roadman. He had just started work mending the road， when he saw me.
　　I'm sorry I ever stopped farming！'he said. 'I was my own boss then. Now I have to do what the government orders， and I'm a prisoner here with aching eyes and a bad back. And my head's going to explode！'
　　He was about the same age as me， and wore big black glass-es. He started to work again，and then stopped.
　　'I can't do it，'he cried. 'I'm going back to bed. '
　　I asked him what the problem was， although I could guess.
　　'It was my daughter's wedding last night，so we were dancing and drinking until four o'clock in the morning. And the new Road Inspector is coming to visit today！ He'll comeand not find me，or he'll come and find me like this. Whatev-er happens， I'm finished. '
　　Then I had an idea. 'Does this new Inspector know you？'
　　'No. He started last week. '
　　'Where's your house？'He pointed to the small house I had seen before.
　　'Well，go back to bed，'I said，'and sleep in peace. I'll do your job for the day and see the Inspector. '
　　He stared at me for a minute，then smiled.
　　'You're the man for me！It's an easy job. 'He pointed to several big heaps of stones along the side of the road. 'Just put the stones down all along the edges of the road. My name's Alexander Turnbull，but my friends call me Ecky. If you speak to the Inspector politely，he'll be happy. I'll come back at five o'clock. '
　　I borrowed his glassed and a very dirty hat and gave him my good clothes. I also borrowed a very old pipe. My new friend walked off slowly to his bed. I hoped he would be inside his house when my enemies arrived.
　　I put as much dirt as possible on my face， hands and clothes， and rubbed some into my eyes to make them red. My boots did not look like a workman's boots，so I kicked them against the rocks to make them look older. The roadman had left his sandwiches and I was happy to eat some of them. There was still nothing moving on the road when I started work.
　　After some time I was getting hot， and I was beginning to count the hours until evening， when I heard a voice，and saw a young man in a small car looking at me.
　　'Are you Alexander Turnbull？'he said. ' I'm the new Road Inspector. You're doing these edges well，but there's a soft place about a kilometre down the hill. Don't forget that， will you？ Good day now. '
　　Clearly，the Inspector thought I was the roadman. As time passed，one or two other cars came along the road，and I bought some biscuits from a travelling shop. Finally，a big car stopped and two men got out and walked towards me. I had seen them before-from the window of the hotel. The fatter of the two looked at me with sharp bright eyes.
　　'Good morning，'he said. 'That's an easy job you've got there. '
　　'There are worse jobs and there are btter jobs，'I said. I spoke in Alexander Turnbull's strong Scottish accent.
　　The other man was looking at my boots. 'You've very fine boots. Were they made near here？'
　　'Oh no， the were made in London. I was given them by a man who was here on holiday last year. '
　　The fatter man spoke to the other in German. 'Let's move on. This man can't help us. '
　　They did ask one more question.
　　'Did you see anyone pass early this morning？Either on a bi－cycle or on foot？'
　　I pretended to think carefully.
　　'I wasn't up very early. You see，my daughter got married yesterday and I went to bed late. I looked out of the house at seven and there was nobody on the road. And I've seen no bicycles this morning. '
　　The thin man gave me a cigar，which I smelt and then put in my pocket. Then they got into the car and were soon out of sight.
　　I continued to work on the road， and I was right to do so. Ten minutes later they passed again， watching me carefully.
　　I hoped Mr Turnbull would stay in bed and I began to won－der what to do next. I couldn't mend roads for ever.
　　Just before five o'clock an open touring car came up the road，and stopped a few metres from me. The driver wanted to light a cigarette， and， by an extraordinary chance， I knew him. His name was Marmaduke Jopley and he was a man I disliked very much. He was only interested in people with money，and in visiting people who lived in beautiful houses in the country. I ran up to the car and took his arm.
　　'Hallo，Jopley. '
　　His mouth opened wide as he looked at me. 'Who are you？'
　　'My name's Hannay，'I said. 'You remember me. '
　　' The murderer！'he cried.
　　'Yes. And there'll be another murder if you don't help me. Give me your coat and hat. '
　　He did what I asked. He was very frightened. I put his coat and hat on，and put Mr Turnbull's hat on Jopley's head. I got in the car and started it.
　　'Now， my friend，'I sald，'you sit quietly and be a good boy. I'm going to borrow your car for an hour or two. '
　　I enjoyed the drive we had that evening. As we drove through the valley， I noticed some men beside the road， but they didn't look at us. I drove on into the hills and as it start－ed to get dark， I turned up a small road and stopped in the middle of a lonely moor. I returned the hat and coat to Jopley.
　　'Thank you very much，' I sald. 'You can be quite useful. Now you'd better go and find the police. '
　　As I sat on the moor and watched the car's lights disappear，I thought about my new life as a criminal. I was not a murder－er， but I had developed a habit of stealing expensive cars.






■ 6 The bald writer
　　Ⅰ spent the night in the hills，in some thick heather be-hind a rock. I had no coat and I was very cold. My coat，Scudder's notebook，my watch and even my pipe and tobacco were with Mr Turnbull. All I had was some biscuits.
　　I had half the biscuits for supper. and tried to keep warm in the heather. I was feeling quite pleased. So far I had been very lucky. The milkman，the man at the hotel，Sir Harry，the roadman and even Marmaduke had all helped me，and I felt that with help like this I might win. My main problem now was that I was very hungry. I fell asleep imagining the most beautiful meals.
　　I woke up very cold in the early morning. I looked down the hill，and in a second I was putting my boots on as fast as I could. There were men only a few hundred metres below me，walking up and searching the heather step by step.
　　Keeping low in the heather，I moved up the hill. At the top，I stood up and showed myself. I heard men shouting，and then I pretended to disappear over the top of the hill， but in fact I got down in the heather and crawled back down into the valley. After twenty minutes I looked back and saw the men disappearing over the top of the hill.
　　I didn't know where I was，but I knew I must keep moving. I was twenty minutes in front of them， but they were local men and they knew these hills better than I did. Soon they were close behind me and I was running as fast as I could. After a time I saw to my left some trees and the chim－neys of a farmhouse. I ran down towards them and found my－self in a garden. As I came nearer the house，I saw an old man looking at me through an open door. I crossed the garden and went in.
　　I was in a pleasant room，with books everywhere. At a desk in the middle sat an old man with a kind face. He had glasses on the end of his nose，and the top of his bald head shone like glass. He didn't move，but looked up and waited for me to speak.
　　I was so surprised by his calmness that for a minute I just stared at him.
　　'You're in a hurry，my friend，'he said slowly.
　　I looked out of the window at the moor. We could both see the line of men walking through the heather.
　　'Ah，I see，'he said. 'The police are after you， are they？Well，we'll talk about it later. I don't like the police in my house when I'm working. Go through that door on the left and close it behind you. You will be safe in there. '
　　And this extraordinary man picked up his pen and started to write.
　　I did what he said， and found myself in a small room with only a very small window high up in one wall. The door closed behind me. Once again I had found somewhere to hide.
　　But I didn't feel comfortable. There was something strange about the old man. I had suddenly appeared in his house， but he didn't seem surprised. And his eyes were frighteningly in－telligent. I waited，and tried to forget that I was very hungry. I thought about breakfast，and suddenly the door opened and there was the old man again.
　　'I told the police you had gone over the hill. This is a lucky morning for you，Mr Richard Hannay，'he said， smiling.
　　As he spoke，his eyes half closed， and immediately I re-membered Scudder's description of a man who could'hood his eyes like a hawk. I saw that I had walked into the hands of my enemies.
　　My first thought was to knock him down and run， but two men came through the door. They were carrying guns.
　　The old man knew my name， but he had never seen me be-fore. I took a chance. 'I don't know what you mean，'I said roughly. 'And who are you calling Hannay？ My name's Ainslie. '
　　'Of course，you have many names，'he said，still smiling. 'We won't argue about a name. '
　　I looked at him angrily. 'I suppose you're going to call the police back. I wish I'd never seen that car. Here's the money. 'I put four pounds on the table.
　　'I won't call the police，'he said. 'This is a private problem between yon and me. '
　　'Oh，stop it！'I cried. 'I've had no luck since I left my ship in Edinburgh. I found a crashed car and took a little money out of it， and I've had the police after me for two days. You do what you like. Ned Ainslie's finished. '
　　I could hear doubt in his voice when he next spoke.
　　'Would you be kind enough to tell me what you've been do－ing for the last few days？'
　　I can't. I haven't eaten for two days. Give me something to eat and I'll tell you the truth. 'I put on my best begging voice.
　　Some food was brought to me， and while I was eating， he said something to me in German. I stared at him stupidly. Then I told him my story. I was a sailor，and I had left my ship in Edinburgh to travel across Scotland to see my brother. I had found a car in a river and taken some money from it. But the police were now chasing me.
　　'They can have their money back，'I cried. ' It's only brought me trouble！'
　　'You're good at lying，Hannay，'he said.
　　I started to get very angry. 'My name's Ainslie and I don't know anybody called Hannay. I'd rather have the police than you and your guns and your Hannays. No，I'm sorry，sir，I'm grateful for the food，but I'd like to go now. '
　　I could see that he was not sure. He had never seen me，and I suppose I did not look like my photograph.
　　'I won't let you go. If you are Mr Ainslie，then you'll soon be able to prove it. If you're not，then I have a surprise for you. '
　　He rang a bell，and a third servant appeared.
　　'I want the car in five minutes，'he said. 'There will be three for lunch. '
　　Then he looked at me， and that was the most frightening thing of all. His eyes were unnatural-bright，cold and evil. I tried to stare back，and even to smile.
　　'You'll know me next time we meet，' I said.
　　'Karl，'he said，speaking in German. 'Put this man in the back room until I return. '
　　I was taken out of the room with a gun at each ear.
　　* * *
　　The back room was very dark and full of old bottles and boxes. The windows had shutters on the outside. The key turned in the door，and I could hear the feet of the guards outside.
　　I sat down feeling very unhappy. The old man had gone to collect his friends，the men who had talked to me when I was the roadman. They would soon discover that I was not the roadman，nor Mr Ainslie，but Richard Hannay. I began to wish I had been found by the police；I would feel safer with them than with this man and his two friends.
　　They were coming for lunch，so I had only two hours. I tried the windows but they would not move. I felt the boxes and bottles，and then found a door in the wall. It was a cup－board door， and it was locked. I had nothing else to do so I pulled on it until it opened.
　　There were a lot of things inside. On one shelf there were some matches， and I used them to look more closely. At the back of one shelf was a strong wooden box. I broke it open and found， to my surprise，some fuses and several small square packets of explosive.
　　I knew that with these I could blow the house up. The problem was that I didn't know how much to use. If I used too much， I would blow myself up. But if I didn't use them at all，I would be dead in three hours.
　　I put one of the squares of explosive near the door， and put a fuse from there to the other side of the room. I lit the fuse and hid behind some boxes. There was silence for five seconds…
　　The wall exploded into a bright yellow light， something fell on my left arm， and I became unconscious.
　　I was unconscious for only a few seconds. Then I stood up，trying not to breathe the yellow smoke. The window had been blown out and I climbed out into the garden. Across the gar－den there were some buildings，and one was an old tower. I felt too ill to go very far，and that seemed the best hiding place.
　　The climb up the outside of that tower was the most difficult thing I ever did. My head felt terrible， and the smoke had made me very sick， but in the end I managed it， and lay down at the top. Then I became unconscious again.
　　When I woke up，my head was burning and the sun was shining into my face. I lay for a long time without moving. I could hear men talking. I looked through a hole in the wall and saw men with guns. There was the bald man and I thought I could see the fat one too.
　　For half an hour they searched all the buildings. They came to the door at the bottom of my tower， and for a minute I thought they were going to come up，but the door was locked.
　　All afternoon I lay on that roof. I was terribly thirsty， and，to make it worse，I could see and hear a small stream which came off the moor and flowed near the farm. I wanted a drink of that cool clear water more than anything in the world.
　　From the tower I could see all the moor around. I saw two men go off in a car， and another man on a horse，and I imag-ined they were looking for me. But I could also see something more interesting. At the top of the hill behind the house was a ring of trees with grass inside. It was clear that this was where the plane landed.
　　It was an excellent place for an airfield. It could not be seen from below because it was at the top of the hill； from the valley，the hill seemed covered with trees. And anyone watching the plane coming in to land would think it was just flying over the hill. I realized that if the plane arrived now， the pilot would probably see me，so I lay still， and hoped night would come quickly.
　　Luckily，when the plane did arrive，it was almost dark. I watched it land，and then waited until everything was quiet. There was no moon， and I was too thirsty to wait，so at nine o'clock I climbed down. Halfway down， somebody came out of the house with a light，and I froze. Then the light disap－peared and I continued down to the ground.
　　I crawled as far as the trees. I guessed that the house would be guarded in some way，so I continued very slowly and care-fully，and found a wire about sixty centimetres from the ground. Falling over that would doubtless start alarm bells ringing in the house.
　　A hundred metres further on there was another wire， but after that it was the open moor. Ten minutes later I had my head in the stream and I drank litres of cold water.
　　I did not stop again until I was ten kilometres from that terrible house.






■ 7 The fisherman
　　Ⅰsat on a hill－top and thought about my next move. I wasn't very happy，because although I had escaped，I was feeling very ill. The smoke had been very unpleasant， and the day on the roof had made things worse. I had a terrible headache，and my arm hurt so badly that I could not move it.
　　I decided to go back to Mr Turnbull's house and find my clothes and Scudder's notebook. Then I would take a train to the south. The sooner I met Sir Harry's friend in the government， Sir Walter Bullivant，the better. I hoped he would believe my story， but，even if he did not， I would be safer with him，or even the British police，than with those men at the farmhouse.
　　It was a clear，starry night and easy to find my way across the hills. I thought I was probably about thirty kilometres from Mr Turnbull's house， so I could not get there in one night. I would have to hide somewhere for the day. When it started to get light，I stopped to wash in a river and then knocked on the door of a small house. I told the woman who lived there that I had had a bad fall， and she could see that I was not well. She gave me some milk and whisky. She also gave me an old coat and hat of her husband's. I now looked like every other Scotsman， and felt safer.
　　It started to rain，and I spent the afternoon under a rock. That night was the most miserable of all. There were no stars，and I got lost a least twice. I had about fifteen kilometres more to go，but I think I walked thirty. In the end， in the very early morning，in a thick fog，I knocked on Mr Turnbull's door.
　　Mr Turnbull opened the door wearing an old black suit and a tie. At first he did not recognize me.
　　'What are you doing here at this time on a Sunday morning？'
　　My head was so bad that I could not answer for a moment，but then he recognized me，and saw that I was ill.
　　'Have you got my glasses？'he asked.
　　I took them out of my pocket and gave them to him.
　　'You want your clothes，'he said. 'Come in. You're not looking well at all. Come and sit down. '
　　I realized that my malaria had come back. I had had malaria in Africa，and it returned sometimes，The smoke，my arm，the wet and the cold had probably not helped. Soon， Mr Turnbull was helping me into a bed.
　　He was a good friend，that roadman. He took care of me for ten days，until my fever had gone and my arm was much bet-ter. He went out to work every day，locking the door，and in the evening he sat by the fire. He asked no questions，but on some days he brought me a newspaper， and I saw that the ex-citement over the Langham Place murder was over.
　　One day he gave me my money back. 'There's a lot of mon－ey there. You'd better count it and see if it's all there. '
　　I wanted to move as soon as possible， but it was not until the 12th of June that I felt well enough to go. I made Turnbull accept some money for my food， but it was difficult.
　　I walked the twenty kilometres to the station in a day. The train to London did not leave until night，so I rested in the heather until it arrived. I was very happy to be in the train，and on the way south.
　　* * *
　　I slept on the train until early morning. Then I changed trains two or three times. At about eight o'clock in the evening I arrived at the small station at Artinswell，to the west of London. The road led through a wood into a green valley. Soon I came to a bridge and looked down into the river，whistling the song'Annie Laurie'.
　　A fisherman walked up from the river，and as he got near to me，he started to whistle the same song. He was a big man in old clothes and a wide hat. He smiled at me， and I looked at his kind，intelligent face.
　　'The water's clear，isn't it？'he said. 'Look at that big fish lying on the bottom. I've been trying to catch him all evening. '
　　'I can't see him，'I said.
　　'Look，over there，near those plants. '
　　'Oh yes，I can see him now. He looks like a black stone. '
　　He whistled again，then paused. 'Your name's Twisdon，isn't it？'
　　'No，'I said. 'I mean yes. 'I had forgotten the name I had given Sir Harry.
　　'It's a good idea to know your own name，'he said，smiling.
　　I looked at him again and began to think that this kind，in－telligent man would be a real ally at last.
　　Then he pointed to a house by the river and said quietly，'Wait five minutes， then come to the back door. 'He walked
　　I did as he asked，and found the back door open and a ser－vant waiting.
　　Come this way，sir，'he said， and took me to a bedroom. There were clothes waiting for me，and shaving things. 'There's a bathroom next door. Dinner is in half an hour. '
　　The servant left，and I sat down. I was very surprised，but also delighted，Sir Walter clearly believed that I was not a murderer，although when I looked at myself in the mirror，I thought I looked very much like one.
　　I had a bath and shaved and put on the clothes. When I had finished，I looked in the mirror again. This time I saw a com－pletely different young man.
　　Sir Walter was waiting for me in the dining room. I decided I must tell him the truth about myself immediately.
　　'I must thank you very much，but I must make something clear，'I said. 'I'm not a murderer， but the police want me. If you'd like me to leave， I'll leave now. '
　　He smiled. 'That's all right. We won't let it stop us eating. Let's talk after dinner. '
　　The food and wine were excellent. After dinner we went to the sitting－room for coffee and he looked at me.
　　I've done what Harry asked me to do，'he said. ' He told me you'd tell me a story to wake me up it I did. So what is your story，Mr Hannay？'
　　I notoced that he was using my real name.
　　I told him the whole story， from the night I came home and found Scudder at my door. I told him what Scudder had told me about Karolides，and saw him smile once or twice. Then I told him about the murder，and the milkman，and Scotland，and Scudder's notebook.
　　'You've got it here？'he asked，and looked pleased when I took it from my pocket.
　　I said nothing about what I had read in Scudder's notes. Then I told him about my meeting with Sir Harry，and he laughed. My day as a roadman interested him. He made me describe the two men in the car，and seemed to be thinking hard. Then he laughed again at my adventure with Mar－maduke Jopley. When I described the old man in the farm－house，he stopped smiling.
　　'Old，bald，and hoods his eyes like a hawk. I don't like the sound of him. And you blew up his house. You're a brave man.
　　I reached the end of my story. He stood up，by the fire，and looked down at me.
　　'You don't need to worry about the police，'he said. 'They don't want you any more. '
　　'Have they arrested the murderer？'
　　'No. But they know it's not you. '
　　'How？'
　　'Because I heard from Scudder. I knew him a bit. He was astrange man，but he was honest. I had a letter from him on the 31st of May. '
　　'But he'd been dead for a week by then. '
　　'The letter was written and posted on the 23rd. His letters usually went to Spaim and then Newcastle，so they took a week to arrive. '
　　'What did he say？'
　　'That he was in danger. He said he was living in Langham Place， and that he was with a good friend. I think he wanted to help you in case he was murdered. When I got the letter，I went to Scotland Yard and talked to the police. '
　　You can imagine that I felt ten times better. I was a free man， and my only enemies were my country's enemies.
　　'Now， let's see this notebook，'said Sir Walter.
　　It took us an hour to work through it. I explained the code and he understood very quickly. When we had finished，he sat silent for a while.
　　'I don't understand all of this，'he said at last. 'He's right about one thing，and that is the meeting on the 15th. How can anyone have discovered about that？ But all this about war and the Black Stone-it's very strange. Scudder did like to make things seem important and exciting. '
　　'The Black Stone，'he repeated. 'It's like a cheap detective story. And all this about Karolides can't be true. Karolides will be alive when we're both dead. No，Scudder's wrong there. There are some unpleasant things going on. Scudder found something out and got killed for it. But all this about stealing the Navy's war plans…I can't really believe it. '
　　Just then，the servant came into the room.
　　' There's a telephone call from London for you， sir. '
　　Sir Walter went out. He came back five minutes later with a white face. 'I apologize to Scudder，'he whispered，and then looked at me. 'Karolides was shot dead at seven o'clock this evening. '






■ 8 The coming of the black stone
　　Ⅰ came down to breakfast the next morning and found Sir Walter reading a coded message. He seemed less re－laxed than yesterday.
　　I was very busy for an hour after you went to bed，'he said. 'I've arranged for the Frenchman， Royer，to come a day early. He will be in London at five o'clock. I don't think the change of day will help very much. If our enemies already knew he was coming，they will probably find out that the plans have changed. I would love to know how the news of his visit escaped. '
　　While I ate，he continued to talk. I was surprised that he was telling me all these important secrets.
　　'Can't the Navy's war plans be changed？'I asked.
　　'They could，'he said. 'But we want to avoid that. It would be very difficult，and some changes would be impossible. But the big problem is that they're not going to steal the plans in the street. They'll try to get the details without anybody knowing，and Royer will return to Paris thinking that every-thing is still secret. '
　　'Then we must stay at Royer's side until he is home again，'I said.
　　'Royer will meet us after dinner at my house in London：there'll be Whittaker from the Navy， myself，Sir Arthur Drew， and General Winstanley. The First Sea Lord，the head of the Navy，has been ill， and may not be able to come. Whittaker will give Royer the important papers， and then Royer will be driven to Portsmouth where a Navy ship will take him to France. He will be watched until he is back there. Whittaker will be watched while he has the papers before he meets Royer. It's the best we can do， and I don't see what can go wrong. But I'm very nervous because of the murder of Karolides. '
　　After breakfast he asked me to be his driver for the day. 'You know what these people are like， and I don't want to take risks. '
　　In London we went first to Scotland Yard where we met an important-looking policeman.
　　'I've brought you the Langham Place murderer，'said Sir Walter. The policeman smiled. 'I wish you had. I imagine you are Mr Hannay. We were very interested in you for a few days. '
　　'Mr Hannay will interest you again， MacGillivray， but his story must wait twenty-four hours. But I would like you to tell Mr Hannay that you don't want to arrest him any more. '
　　'Of course we don't. 'The policeman turned to me. 'Your flat and your servant are waiting for you， although you may not want to return there. '
　　As Sir Walter and I left， he said I was free for the rest of the day. 'Come and see me tomorrow， Hannay. I don't need to tell you to keep everything secret. You had better stay out of sight. If your Black Stone friends see you， there might be trouble. '
　　* * *
　　I didn't know what to do. It was strange to be a free man. I went to a very good restaurant for lunch，but I was still feeling nervous. When anybody looked at me， I wondered if they were thinking about the murder. I walked around London，thinking. I knew that by now Royer would be in England，and I felt sure that something terrible was going to happen and that only I could stop it. But it was not my business now.
　　I didn't want to go back to my flat. I had to go back some time， but I decided to stay at a hotel tonight.
　　I had supper in another restaurant， and thought that after that I would go to Sir Walter's house. He might not want me there， but I would feel happier if I went.
　　As I walked through London towards his house， I met a group of young men. One of them was Marmaduke Jopley.
　　'It's the murderer！' he cried. ' Stop him！ That's Hannay， the Langham Place murderer！'He took hold of my arm， and the others crowded round me.
　　I didn't want trouble，but I was feeling angry. A policeman came up， and instead of explaining the mistake to him quietly and sensibly， I just hit out wildly at Marmaduke's stupid face. I felt much happier when he was lying on his back in the road. Then a general fight started， until the policeman got hold of me. I heard him ask what the matter was， and Marmaduke，talking through his broken teeth，told him that I was Hannay the murderer.
　　I was so angry that I pushed the policeman one way and one of Marmaduke's friends the other， and ran as fast as I could. There was shouting behind me，but I had escaped. I ran all the way to Sir Walter's house， walked up to the door and rang. I hoped the door would open quickly.
　　It did.
　　'I must see Sir Walter，'I said to the servant. 'It's desper ately important. '
　　The servant let me in，and then shut the door behind me. 'Sir Walter is in a meeting，sir. Perhaps you will wait. '
　　There was a telephone and one or two chairs in the hall，and I sat down there.
　　'Listen，'I whispered to the servant. 'I'm in a bit of trouble，but I'm working for Sir Walter. If anyone comes to the door and asks for me， tell them I'm not here. '
　　There was a sudden ringing at the door， and he went to open it. He told them whose house it was，and that nobody could come in，and then shut the door.
　　* * *
　　A few minutes later there was another ring at the door， and the servant did not hesitate to let this visitor in. Everybody knew his face from the newspapers—a square， grey beard and bright blue eyes Lord Alloa，the First Sea Lord，and head of the British Navy.
　　He was shown into a room at the end of the hall. I sat there for twenty minutes. Surely the meeting would end soon；Royer must leave for Portsmouth by eleven o'clock.
　　Then the door opened again and the First Sea Lord came out. He walked past me， and in passing he looked at me and for a second I looked into his eyes. It was only for a second，but my heart jumped. The First Sea Lord had never seen me before， but in his eyes I saw that he recognized me. Then he passed me and was out of the door into the street.
　　I picked up the telephone book and looked up the number of Lord Alloa's house. I spoke to one of his servants.
　　'Is Lord Alloa at home？'I asked.
　　'Yes， but he's ill and has been in bed all day. Do you want to leave a message， sir？'
　　I put down the telephone and sat down， shaking. My part in this business was not finished. I walked straight into the room where the others were meeting.
　　Sir Walter looked surprised and annoyed. 'I'm afraid that this is not a good time， Mr Hannay. '
　　'I think it is，'I answered. 'Tell me， please， who left this room a minute ago. '
　　'Lord Alloa，'said Sir Walter，looking angrier.
　　'It Was not，'I cried. 'It looked like him but it was not him. It was a man who recognized me， who has seen me in the last month. I've just telephoned Lord Alloa' s house and he's been ill in bed all day. '
　　'Who…'someone asked.
　　'The Black Stone，'I cried， sitting down，and looking at five frightened men.






■ 9 The thirty-nine steps
　　Sir Walter got up and left the room. He came back after ten minutes. 'I've spoken to Alloa. I got him out of bed-he was very angry. He hasn't left his house all day. '
　　'It's impossible，' said Winstanley. ' I sat next to him for nearly half an hour. '
　　'That's what's so clever，' I said. 'You were too interested in other things to look at him closely. You knew that he might be well enough to come tonight and，as First Sea Lord，it was natural for him to be here. Why should you suspect that it wasn't him？'
　　Then the Frenchman spoke，very slowly，and in good English.
　　'This young man is right. He understands our enemies. People only see what they expect to see. This man came late，spoke little，and left early but he behaved exactly as we would expect Lord Alloa to behave. '
　　'But I don't understand，'said Winstanley. 'Our enemies don't want us to know what they have learnt about our war plans. But if one us talked to Alloa abut tonight's meeting，we would discover immediately that he hadn't been here. '
　　Sir Walter laughed angrily. 'That shows their cleverness again， in choosing Alloa. They took a risk， but everybody knows that Alloa is a sick man and is often too ill to go to meetings. And even when he is well，he is impatient，difficult，and a man of very few words. Which of us was likely to speak to him about tonight？'
　　'But the spy hasn't taken the plans，'said Winstanley. ' He saw them， but could he carry away pages of information in his head？'
　　'It's not difficult，'said the Frenchman. 'A good spy can remember things photographically. '
　　'Well，I suppose we'll have to change our plans，'said Sir Walter unhappily. 'There's another problem，'said Royer. 'I said a lot about the plans of the French army. That information will be very valuable to our enemies. That man， and his friends，must be stopped immediately. '
　　'They could simply send their information in a letter，'said Whittaker. 'It may already be in the post. '
　　'No，' said Rower. 'A spy brings home his information personally and he collects his pay personally. These men must cross the sea， so we still have a chance. You must watch the coast and search ships. It is desperately important for both France and Britain. '
　　Royer was right. We could do something. But none of us felt very hopeful. How， among the forty million people in Britain， could we find the three cleverest criminals in Europe？
　　* * *
　　Then，suddenly， I had an idea. 'Where is Scudder's book？'I asked Sir Walter. 'Quick， I remember something in it. '
　　He gave it to me.
　　I found the place. 'Thirty－nine steps，'I read， and again， 'Thirty－nine steps-I counted them－high tide，10. 17p. m. '
　　Whittaker clearly thought I had gone mad.
　　'Don' t you see it's a clue？' I cried. 'Scudder knew where they were going to leave England. Tomorrow was the day，and it's somewhere where high tide is at 10. 17. '
　　'Perhaps they've already gone tonight，'someone suggested.
　　'Not them. They have their own secret way，and why should they hurry？They don't know that we're after them. Where can I get a book of Tide Tables？'
　　Whittaker looked happier. 'It's a chance，'he said. 'Let's go to the Navy Offices. '
　　Sir Walter went off to Scotland Yard to get MacGilllvray. The rest of us drove to the Navy Offices where we went to a big room full of books and maps. We got a copy of the Tide Tables， and I sat down and looked through it while the others watched.
　　It was no good. There were more than fifty places where high tide was at 10. 27. We needed more information than that.
　　I thought hard. What did Scudder mean by steps，and why was it so important to count them？ It must be somewhere with several paths going down to the sea. This path would be the only one with thirty－nine steps.
　　I had another thought and checked the time of regular ships leaving England. There was no ship at 10. 17.
　　Why was high tide important？In a big harbour the tide doesn't matter. It is only important in a small harbour，or somewhere where there is no harbour at all.
　　Then I thought about where a man would leave England if he were going to Germany. Not from the south coast， or the west coast， or Scotland. It would be somewhere on the east coast， probably between Cromer and Dover.
　　I am not Sherlock Holmes. But I am used to using my head，and when I guess， my guesses are often right.
　　I wrote out my ideas on a piece of paper：
　　ALMOST CERTAIN
　　（1） A place where there are several paths down to the sea.
　　One of these has thirty－nine steps.
　　（2） High tide at 10. 17p. m. A place where it is only possible for a ship to leave the coast at high tide.
　　（3） Probably not a harbour， but open coast with cliffs and a beach.
　　（4）Ship probably a small one，a yacht or a fishing boat.
　　（5） Somewhere on the east coast between Cromer and Dover.
　　It seemed strange to be sitting at a table， watched by a groupof very important people， trying to understand something written by a dead man. But it was a matter of life or death to us.
　　Sir Walter and MacGillivray arrived. They had men watching all the harbours and railway stations with descriptions of the three men. But none of us thought that this would help 'Here's the best I can do，'I said. 'We have to find a place where there is a path with thirty－nine steps down to a beach. It must be somewhere on the east coast. Of course，it's somewhere where high tide is at 10. 17 tomorrow night. Who can we ask who knows the east coast really well？'
　　Whittaker said he knew a man who lived in south London. He went off in a car to get him and came back at about one o'clock in the morning with an old sailor who had worked all his life on the east coast.
　　'We want you to tell us about places you know on the east coast where there are cliffs and steps going down to the beach，'said Winstanley.
　　He thought for a minute or two. 'There are a lot of seaside towns-holiday places-where there are steps from the town down to the beach. '
　　'No， that's not private enough，'I said.
　　'Well， I don't know. Of course， there's the Ruff—'
　　'What's that？'
　　'It's in Kent，near Bradgate. There are cliffs with houses along the top-big houses. Some of the houses have steps down to a beach Mostly rich people live there， the sort of people who like to be private.
　　I opened the Tide Tables at Bradgate. High tide was at 10. 27 on the 15th of June.
　　'This looks hopeful，'I cried. 'How can I find out when high tide is at the Ruff？'
　　'I can tell you that， sir，'said the sailor. 'I used to go fishing there. High tide is ten minutes before Bradgate. '
　　I closed the book and looked up at the others.
　　'If one of those paths has thirty－nine steps， then I think we have a good chance，'I said. 'Can I take a car， Sir Walter， and a map？ If Mr MacGillivray can help me，perhaps we can prepare something for tomorrow. '
　　It seemed strange for me to take control like this. But I was used to action， and they could see it. It was the Frenchman，Royer，who said what they were all thinking. 'I am quite happy，'he said，'to leave this business in Mr Hannay's hands. '
　　At half-past three in the morning I was driving through Kent in the moonlight，with MacGillivray next to me.






■ 10 Meetings by the sea
　　It was a fine，blue June morning，and I was outside a hotel in Bradgate looking out to sea. There was a ship out there，and I could see that it was a warship of some kind. Mac Gillivray had been in the navy and knew the ship. I sent a message to Sir Walter to ask if it could help us if necessary.
　　After breakfast we walked along the beach under the Ruff. I kept hidden， while MacGillivray counted the six lots of steps in the cliff.
　　I waited for an hour while he counted，and when I saw him coming towards me with a piece of paper，I was very nervous.
　　He read out the numbers. 'Thirty-four，thirty-five，thirtynine，forty-two，forty-seven，and twenty-one. 'I almost got up and shouted.
　　We walked back to Bradgate quickly. MacGillivray had six policemen sent down from London. He then went off to look at the house at the top of the thirty-nine steps.
　　The information he brought back was neither good nor bad.
　　The house was called Trafalgar House，and belonged to an old man called Appleton. He was there at the moment. The neighbours didn't know him well. MacGillivray had then gone to the back door of the house， pretending to be a man selling sewing machines . There were three servants，and he spoke to the cook . He was sure she knew nothing. Next door a new house was being built， which might be a good place to watch from；and on the other side the house was empty. Its garden was rather wild，and would also be a good place to hide in.
　　I took a telescope and found a good hiding place from which to watch the house. I watched for a time，and saw an old man leave the house and walk into the back garden at the top of the cliff. He sat down to read a newspaper，but he looked out to sea several times. I thought he was probably looking at the warship I watched him for half an hour，until he went back into the house for lunch. Then I went back to the hotel formine.
　　I wasn't feeling very confident. That old man might be the old man I had met in the farmhouse on the moors. But there are hundreds of old men in houses by the sea，and he was probably just a nice old man on his holidays.
　　After lunch I sat in front of the hotel and looked out to sea；and then I felt happier，because I saw something new. A yacht came up the coast and stopped a few hundred metres off the Ruff MacGillivray and I went down to the harbour， got a boat，and spent the afternoon fishing.
　　We caught quite a lot of fish， and then，at about four o'clock，went to look at the yacht. It looked like a fast boat and its name was the Ariadne. I spoke to a sailor who was cleaning the side of the boat， and he was certainly English. So was the next sailor we spoke to，and we had quite a long conversation about the weather.
　　Then，suddenly，the men stopped talking and started work again，and a man in uniform walked up. He was a pleasant，friendly man， and asked us about the fishing in very goodEnglish. But I was sure that he was not English himself.
　　I felt a little more confident after seeing him， but as we went back to Bradgate，I was still not sure. My enemies had killed Scudder because they thought he was a danger to them. They had tried to kill me-for the same reason. So why hadn' t they changed their escape plans？They didn't know about Scudder's black notebook， but why stay with the same plan when there was a chance that I knew about it？It seemed a stupid risk to take.
　　I decided to spend an hour or two watching Trafalgar House and found a good place where I could look down on the garden. I could see two men playing tennis. One was the old man I had already seen；the other was a younger， fatter man. They played well，and were clearly enjoying themselves like two businessmen on holiday. I have never seen anything more harmless. They stopped for a drink， and I asked myself if I wasn't the most stupid man alive. These were two normal， boring Englishmen，not the clever murderers that I had met in Scotland.
　　Then a third man arrived on a bicycle. He walked into the garden and started talking to the tennis players. They were all laughing in a very English way. Soon they went back into the house，laughing and talking，and I stayed there feeling stupid.
　　These men might be acting，but why？ They didn't know I was watching and listening to them. They were just three perfectly normal，harmless Englishmen.
　　* * *
　　But there were three of them：and one was old，and one was fat，and one was thin and dark. And a yacht was waiting a kilometre away with at least one German on it. I thought about Karolides lying dead，and all Europe trembling on the edge of war， and about the men waiting in London，hoping that I would do something to stop these spies.
　　I decided there was only one thing to do. I had to continue and just hope for the best. I didn't want to do it. I would rather walk into a room full of wild animals than walk into that happy English house and tell those three men they were under arrest. How they would laugh at me！
　　Then I remembered something that an old friend in Africa once told me. He had often been in trouble with the police. He once talked about disguises with me， and he said that the way somebody looked was not the real secret. He said that what mattered was the'feel'of somebody. If you moved to completely different surroundings，and if you looked comfortable and at home there，you would be very difficult to recognize. My friend had once borrowed a black coat and tie and gone to church and stood next to the policemen who was looking for him. The policemen had only seen him shooting out the lights in a pub，and he did not recognize him in a church.
　　Perhaps these people were playing the same game. A stupid man tries to look different；a clever man looks the same and is different.
　　My friend had also told me this：'If you want to disguise yourself， you must believe that you're the person you're pretending to be. 'That would explain the game of tennis. These men weren't acting；they just changed from one life to another，and the new life was as natural as the old. It is the secret of all great criminals.
　　It was now about eight o'clock. I went back to seeMacGillivray and we arranged where the other policeman would hide. After that I went for a walk along the coast，looking at the peaceful people on holiday. Out at sea I could see lights on the Ariadne，and on the warship，and， further away，the lights of other ships. Everything seemed so normal and peaceful that I couldn't believe the three men were my criminals. But I turned and walked towards Trafalgar House at about half past nine.
　　MacGillivray's men were，I supposed，in their hiding places. The house was quiet， but I could just hear the sound of voices；the men were just finishing their dinner Feeling very stupid，I walked up to the door and rang the bell.
　　When a servant opened the door， I asked for Mr Appleton and was shown in. I had planned to walk straight in and surprize the men into recognizing me. But I started looking at all the pictures on the wall There were photographs of groups of English schoolboys and lots of other things that you only find in an English home. The servant walked in front of me into the dining-room and told the men who I was，and I missed the chance of surprise.
　　When I walked in， the old man stood up and turned round to meet me. The other two turned to look at me. The old man was perfectly polite.
　　'Mr Hannay？'he said. 'Did you wish to see me？'
　　I pulled up a chair and sat down.
　　'I think we've met before，'I said， 'and I guess you know why I'm here. '
　　The light in the room was not bright， but I think they all looked very surprised.
　　'Perhaps，perhaps，'said the old man. ' I'm afraid I don' t remember faces very well. You'll have to tell me why you're here，because I really don' t know. '
　　'Well，'I said， although I didn't really believe what I was saying，'I have come to arrest all three of you. '
　　'Arrest！'said the old man in surprise. 'Arrest！What for？'
　　'For the murder of Franklin Scudder in London on the 23rd of May. '
　　'I've never heard the name before，' said the old man.
　　One of the others spoke. 'That was the Langham Place murder. I read about that in the newspapers. But you must be mad！Where do you come from？'
　　'Scotland Yard，'I said.
　　Then there was silence for a moment until the fat one started to talk，hesitating a lot between words.
　　'Don't worry， uncle. It's all a stupid mistake. Even the police make mistakes. I wasn't even in England on the 23rd，and Bob was in hospital. You were in London，but you can explain what you were doing. '
　　'You're right，Percy，it's easy. The 23rd！That was the day after Agatha's wedding. Yes，I had lunch with Charlie Symons and in the evening I went to the Cardwells'. Why， they gave me that！'He pointed to a cigar box on the table.
　　'I think you will see that you have made a mistake，'the thin dark man said to me politely. 'We are quite happy to help Scotland Yard，and we don't want the police to make stupid mistakes. That's so， isn't it， uncle？'
　　'Certainly，Bob. 'The old man looked happier now. 'Certainly we'll help if we can. But this is madness. ' 'This will make our friends laugh，'said the fat man. 'They think we're boring and that nothing ever happens to us. Hebegan to laugh very pleasantly.
　　'Yes， it's a good story. Really， Mr Hannay，I should be angry，but it's too funny. You really frightened me！ You looked too serious. I thought I'd killed somebody in my sleep！'
　　They weren't acting. There was nothing false about them. At first I wanted to apologize and leave. Then I stood up and went to the door and turned on the main light. I looked at the three faces.
　　I saw nothing to help me. One was old and bald， one was fat，one was dark and thin. They could be the three men I had seen in Scotland，but I could see nothing to prove it.
　　'Well，'said the old man politely，'are you sure now that we are not murderers，or are you going to take us to the police station？'
　　There was nothing to do except call in the men outside and arrest them， or say I had made a mistake and leave. And I couldn't decide.
　　'While we're waiting，let's have a game of cards，' said the fat one. 'It will give Mr Hannay time to think，and we need a fourth player. Will you play？'
　　I agreed，but everything suddenly seemed unreal. We went into another room，where there was a table and cards. The window was open and the moon was shining on the cliffs and the sea. We played and they talked. I'm usually quite good at cards，but that night I played extremely badly.
　　* * *
　　Then something woke me up.
　　The old man put his cards down for a moment and sat back in his chair with his hand on his knee. It was a movement I had seen before，in that farm on the moors， with two servants with guns behind me. Suddenly my head cleared and I looked at the three men differently.
　　It was ten o'clock.
　　The three faces seemed to change in front of my eyes. The thin dark man was the murderer. His knife had killed Scudder. The fat man had been the First Sea Lord last night.
　　But the old man was the worst. How had I ever thought he looked kind and friendly？ His eyes were cold and evil and frightening. I went on playing， but I hated him more and more with every card.
　　'Look at the time，Bob，said the old man. 'Don't forget you've got a train to catch. He must be in London tonight，'he said， turning to me. His voice now sounded completely false.
　　'I'm afraid he must wait，'I said.
　　'Oh， no！'said the thin man. 'I thought you'd finished with that. I must go. You can have my address. '
　　'No，'I said，'you must stay. '
　　I think then they realized they were in real trouble. I looked at the old man and I saw his eyes hood like a hawk.
　　I blew my whistle.
　　Immediately the lights went out. Someone held me to my chair.
　　'Quickly，Franz，'somebody shouted in German，'the boat，the boat！'I saw two policemen on the grass behind the house.
　　The thin dark man jumped through the window and was across the grass before anybody could stop him. I was fighting the old man，and more police came into the room. I saw them holding the fat man. But the thin man was at the top of the steps. I waited，holding the old man，for the time it would take the thin man to get to the sea.
　　Suddenly，the old man escaped from me and ran to the wall of the room. From underneath the ground I heard an explosion. The cliff and the steps had been blown up.
　　The old man looked at me with wild， crazy eyes.
　　'He is safe，'he cried. 'You cannot follow him. The Black Stone has won. '
　　This old man was more than just a paid spy. Those hooded eyes shone with a deep，burning love for his country. But as the police took him away，I had one more thing to say.
　　'Your friend has not won. We put our men on the Ariadne an hour ago. '
　　* * *
　　Seven weeks later，as all the world knows，we went to war. I joined the army in the first week. But I did my best work， I think， before I put on uniform.




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Little Women by Louisa May Alcott





■ 1 Four sisters
　　'Christmas won't be Christmas without any presents，'said Jo crossly．
　　'It's so awful to be poor！'agreed Meg，looking at her old dress．
　　'It's not right for some girls to have pretty things，and others to have nothing at all，'said little Amy．
　　'We've got Father and Mother，'and each other，'said Beth gently．
　　The four young faces round the fire cheered up as they thought of this， but then Jo said sadly，'We haven't got Father，and we won't have him for a long time．'She didn't say 'perhaps never，'but each silently thought it，remembering that he was away at the war in the South．
　　Then Meg said，'Mother says we shouldn't spend money on presents when our men are fighting a war．'
　　'We can't expect anything from Mother or each otehr，'said Jo，' but we only have a dollar each， and that won't help the army much． Let's each buy ourselves what we want， and have a little fun． We work hard to earn it．'
　　'I do， teaching those awful children，' said Meg．'What abut me？'said Jo．' I'm shut up all day working for a terrible old lady， who gives me different orders every five seconds！'
　　'I think washing cups and plates and keeping things tidy is the worst work in the world，'said Beth．'My hands get too tired to play my music．'
　　'I have to go to school with girls who laugh at my dresses and say cruel things because my father isn't rich，'said Amy．
　　'I wish we had the money Father lost when we were little，Jo，'said Meg．
　　'I wish I was a boy，' said Jo．'Then I could go and fight beside Father！'
　　Meg was sixteen and very pretty， with large eyes and soft brown hair，and white hands．Fifteen-year-old Jo was very tall and thin． Her long，dark－red hair was usually pushed up out of the way． Beth was thirteen，a very shy girl who seemed to live in a happy world of her own．Amy was the youngest， but thought herself to be the most important． She had blue eyes，and yellow hair which curled on to her shoulders．
　　At six o'clock，Beth put a pair of slippers by the fire to warm and Meg lit the lamp．Amy got out of the comfortable chair without bing asked， and Jo forgot how tired she was and held the slippers closer to the fire．
　　'These are old， she said．'Mother needs a new pair．'
　　'I'll get her some with my dollar，'said Beth．
　　'No，I shall！'cried Amy．
　　'I'm the oldest—'began Meg．
　　'I'm the man of the family now Father is away， and I shall buy tnem，'said Jo．
　　'Let's each get her something and not get anything for ourselves，'said beth．
　　'That's a kind idea！'said Jo．'What shall we get？'
　　Everyone thought for a moment，then Meg said，'I'll give her a nice pair of gloves．'
　　'The best army slippers，said Jo．
　　'Some handkerchiefs，'said Beth．
　　'A little bottle of perfume，'said Amy．'It won't cost much， so I'll have some money left to buy something for me．'
　　'We'll let Mother think we're getting things for ourselves，and then surprise her，'said Jo．
　　Mrs March arrived home soon after． She took off her wet things and put on her warm slippers． Meg made the tea， Jo brought wood for the fire，Beth was quiet and busy，and Amy gave orders．
　　I've got a letter from Father！'cried Mrs March．
　　It was a letter to cheer them up， and the special message for the girls came at the end： Give them all my love and a kiss．I think of them every day．I know they will be loving childrento you，and that when I come back，I will be prouder than ever of my little women．
　　A tear dropped off the end of Jo's nose．
　　Amy hid her face on her momer's shoulder ．'I'm selfish，'she cried，'but I'll try to be better．'
　　'We all will！' cried Meg．'I think too much about the way I look， and hate to work， but I won't any more．'
　　'And I'll try to be a“little woman”，'said Jo，'and not be rough and wild．'
　　Beth said nothing， but she began to work hard at a blue army glove she was making．
　　So the four girls decided that they would all try very hard to be good．They would never be cross，or lazy，or selfish-and they would all help each other．They talked over their plan that evening，while they made sheets for Aunt March．Then at nine o'clock they stopped to sing a song．Beth played the old piano， and Meg and her mother led the singing．Jo always sang in the wrong place， but the girls never got too old to sing together．






■ 2 A Happy Christmas
　　Jo was the first to wake up on Christmas morning，but soon they were all awake and they went downstairs．
　　'Where's Mother？'asked Meg．
　　'I don't know，'said old Hannah．She had lived with the family since Meg was born，and was more like a friend than a servant．'Some poor woman came to the door and your mother went off to see what was needed．'
　　'She'll be back soon，'said Meg． She looked at the presents for her mother which were in a basket under a chair， ready to bring out at the right time．'Where is Amy's bottle of perfume？'
　　She went to put some pretty paper round it，I think，'said Jo．
　　Suddenly， they heard the outside door close．
　　'Here's Mother！ Hide the basket， quick！' said Jo．
　　But it was Amy．She came in quickly．
　　'Where have you been，and what's that behind you？'asked Meg．
　　'I ran to the shop and changed the little bottle of perfume for a big one，'said Amy．'I spent all my money to get it，and I'm not going to be selfish any more！'
　　Meg smiled proudly and put her arms around her sister．Then there was another bang from the outside door， and the basket was pushed back under the chair．The girls ran to the table， ready for their breakfast．
　　'Happy Christmas， Mother！'they shouted．
　　Happy Christmas，little daughters！'said Mrs March．
　　Then the smile disappeared from her face．'Girls，listen．Not far away is a poor woman，Mrs Hummel，with a new baby．Her six children are in one bed， trying to keep warm，as they have no wood for a fire．There is nothing to eat and they are hungry and cold．Will you give them your breakfast as a Christmas present？
　　For a minute no one spoke．Then Jo said，'Mother， I'm so glad you came back before we began to eat！'And the girls quickly began to put their breakfast in a basket．
　　'I knew you would do it，'said Mrs March，smiling．
　　She took the girls and Hannah to a cold ， miserable little room in an old building， where they found a sick mother， a crying baby，and a group of children with white，frightened faces．The children were on the bed under a blanket，trying to keep warm．
　　The woman almost cried with happiness when she saw the girls．Hannah，who had brought wood，made a fire． Mrs March gave the mother tea and hot food，then she dressed the little baby gently．The girls put the children round the fire and fed them like hungry birds．
　　It was a very happy meal， although the girls ate none of it．But no one was happier than those hungry young ladies who gave away their breakfast on Christmas morning．
　　Mrs March was surprised and pleased when she saw her presents later．There was a lot of laughing and kissing and explaining．Then，for the rest of the day，the girls were busy．Jo liked to write plays，and the four of them were going to act one that evening．They had learned their words， and had worked hard to make strange and wonderful clothes for all the different characters in the play．
　　On Christmas night， some other girls came to watch． At first，there was a lot of whispering and laughing from the four sisters behind the curtains．Then the curtains were opened and the play began．
　　It was an exciting story about Hugo（acted by Jo wearing a black beard！）， beautiful Zara and brave Roderigo．There were also two ghosts，a cruel king，and a tall castle made of paper and wool-which unfortunately fell down just as Roderigo and Zara were escaping from it．There were screams of laughter from everyone， but the actors picked the mselves up and carried on through more dangers and mysteries until the happy ending was reached．
　　All the visitors loved the play，and after the excitement and fun came a surprise for everyone．
　　'would the young ladles like to stay for supper？'asked Hannah．
　　And when the girls saw the supper table，they could not believe their eyes！There was ice-cream， cake，fruit，and French chocolate！ And in the middle of the table were flowers for each of the four actors．
　　'Where did it all come from？'asked Amy．
　　'From Father Christmas， perhaps？'said Beth．
　　'Mother did it，'said Meg．
　　Aunt March sent it，'said Jo．
　　'You're all wrong，'laughed Mrs March．'Old Mr Laurence sent it！'
　　'The Laurence boy's grandfather？'said Meg．'But we don't know him．'
　　'Hannah told his servant about your breakfast party， and that pleased him，'said Mrs March．'He knew my faher many years ago，and he sent me a note this afternoon，asking if he could send my cbildren a few small Christmas presents．'
　　'The idea came from that boy，I know it did！'said Jo．'I'm sure he wants to know us，but he's shy，and Meg won't let me speak to him when we pass him in the street．She says that it's not at all polite for young ladies to introduce themselves to strangers．
　　'You mean the people who live in the big house next door，don't you？'said one of the other girls．'My mother knows old Mr Laurence． She says he keeps his grandson in the house when the boy isn't riding or walking with his tutor， and makes him study very hard．We invited the boy to our party but he didn't come．'
　　'That boy needs to have some fun，'said Jo．






■ 3 The Laurence boy
　　'Look！'said Meg，excitedly，a day or two later．
　　She waved a piece of paper at Jo．'An invitation to a New Year's party at Sallie Gardiner's house，and it's for both of us．Mother says we can go， but what shall we wear？'
　　'Our best cotton dresses，'said Jo， 'because we haven't got anything else Yours is as good as new， but mine has a burn and a hole in the back．'
　　Then you must keep your back out of sight，'said Meg．'I'll have a new ribbon for my hair， and my new slippers．And my gloves are all right．'
　　'Mine are stained，soI'll have to go without．'
　　'You must wear gloves to a dance， Jo！ cried Meg．
　　'Then we'll each wear one good one and carry a bad one，'said Jo．
　　Meg looked worried．'All right， but you will behave nicely，won't you？Don't stare，or put your hands behind your back．'
　　On New Year's Eve，the two younger sisters watched the two older girls get ready for the party．There was a lot of running up and down，and laughing and talking．Meg wanted some curls around her face，so Jo began to work on the papered ends of Meg's hair with a pair of hot tongs．
　　'Should they smoke like that？'asked Beth．
　　'It's the wetness drying，'said Jo．
　　'What a strange burning smell！'said Amy．
　　'I'll take the papers off now，'said Jo，'and you'll see lots of little curls．
　　She took the papers off-and，to her horror，the burnt hair came off with them！
　　'Oh，oh！What have you done to my hair！'cried Meg．
　　'I always get things wrong，'said Jo unhappily．'I'm so sorry．I suppose the tongs were too hot．'
　　Don't worry，'Amy told Meg， who was crying．'Just tie your ribbon so that the ends come on to your forehead a little，and it will look quite fashionable．'
　　At last，Meg and Jo were ready and went off to the Gardiners'house where Mrs Gardiner welcomed them kindly．Meg immediately began to enjoy herself with Sallie，but Jo wasn't interested in girlish talk and stood with her back carefully against wall，watching the dancing．Soon Meg was asked to dance，then Jo saw a big red-haired boy coming towards her and she quickly went through a door into a small room．Unfortunately， another shy person was already hiding there and she found herself looking at the'Laurence boy'．
　　'Oh dear，I didn't know any one was here！'Jo said．
　　The boy laughed．'Don't go． I came in here because I don't know any people， but I think I've seen you before，'he said，'You live near us，don't you？'
　　'Next door， said Jo．'We enjoyed your nice Christmas present．'
　　'My grandfather sent it，Miss March．'
　　'But you gave your grandfather the idea，didn't you， Mr Laurence？
　　I'm not Mr Laurence，only Laurie，'he said．
　　'And I'm not Miss March，only Jo，'she said．'Do you like parties？
　　'Sometimes，'he answered．I've been abroad a lot recent ly，and I don't know how you do things here．'
　　'Abroad！'said Jo．'Oh，did you go to Paris？'
　　'We went there last winter．'
　　'Can you speak French？'she asked．
　　He said something in French， and Jo listened carefully．'You asked，“Who is the young lady in the pretty slippers？”It's my sister，Meg，and you knew it was！Do you think she's pretty？'
　　'Yes，'he said．'She looks so fresh and quiet．'
　　This pleased Jo very much， and soon the two of them were talking easily， like old friends．'I hear you're always studying hard，'said Jo．'Are you going to college soon？'
　　'Not for a year or two，'he said．'I'm sixteen next month，and I won't go before I'm seventeen．'
　　'I wish I was going to college，said Jo．
　　'I hate even the idea of it！'said Laurie．
　　Jo wanted to know why， but he looked so serious that instead of asking she said，'Why don't you go and dance？'
　　'I will if you'll come too，'be answered．
　　'I can't because—' Jo stopped．
　　'Because what？'
　　'You won't tell？'
　　'Never！'
　　'I' ve a bad habit of standing near a fire，and I burn my dresses，'said Jo．'I have to keep still so that no one will see the burn on this one． Laugh if you like．'
　　But Laurie didn't laugh．'Never mind that，he said gently．'Please come．'
　　Jo smiled．'All right，'she said．'Thank you．'
　　When the music stopped， they sat down and began to talk，but Jo saw Meg waving at her． She went over and followed her sister into a side room．
　　'I've turned my foot over and hurt my ankle，'said Meg．'I can't walk on it， and I don't know how I'm going to get home．'
　　'I'm not surprised you turned your foot over in those stupid high shoes，'said Jo．'You'll have to get a carriage or stay here all night．'
　　'A carriage will cost a lot，' said Meg，'and I can't stay here for the night because the house is full． I'll just rest until Hannah comes to fetch us，then do the best I can．'
　　'They're going in for supper now，'said Jo．'I'll stay with you．
　　'No，run and bring me some coffee，' said Meg．
　　Jo found the coffee， but immediately dropped some down the front of her dress． She was cleaning it off with Meg's glove when a friendly voice spoke to her．
　　'Gan I help？'said Laurie．He had a cup of coffee in one hand and a plate with a cake on it in the other．
　　'I was trying to get something for Meg，'said Jo．
　　'And I was looking for someone to give this to，' he said．He fetched more coffee and a cake for Jo， then the three of them had a happy time talking together until Hannah arrived．Meg completely forgot about her foot and stood up quickly．She cried out with pain，and when Laurle saw that she could not walk， he immediately offered to take them home in his grandfather's carriage．
　　'But you can't want to go home yet，'said Jo．
　　'I always go early，'said Laurie．
　　He sat with the driver， and the two girls sat with Hannah inside the carriage and talked excitedly about the party．
　　'I had a wonderful time，did you？' said Jo．
　　'Yes，until I hurt myself，'said Meg．'Salie's friend，Annie Moffat， has asked me to go and stay with her for a week in the spring， when Sallie does．'
　　Jo told Meg her adventures，and then they were home．They thanked Laurie and went quietly into the house， hoping to wake no one． But as soon as they opened their bedroom door，two little voices cried out：'Tell us about the party！Tell us about the party！'






■ 4 The house next door
　　'It's so nice to go to parties and drive home in carriages．'said Mea，the next morning．'Other people live like that all the time，and I wish we could．I wish we were rich．'
　　'Well， we're not，'said Jo．' So we must do our work with a smile，the way Mother does．'
　　Mr March had lost most of his money helping a friend．When the two older girls discovered this，they wanted to do something to earn some money for the family， and as soon as they were old enough，they found work．Meg got a job teach ing four small children．It was hard for her to be poor because she could remember the time when their home had been beautiful，with every thing they wanted． And every day at Mrs King's house she saw pretty dresses，and heard talk of parties and the theatre-all the things which Meg loved．
　　Jo went to Aunt March，who needed someone to fetch and carry things，and read to her．She was a difficult old lady who complained a lot，but Jo did her best．
　　Beth was much too shy to go to school with other children，so she studied at home with her father． When he went away，and her mother was busy with war work， Beth continued to study by herself and helped Hannah keep the home tidy for the others． She also spent long，quiet hours alone，talking to her dolls or playing the old piano．Beth loved music and，although the family could not afford music lessons or a good piano for her， she tried hard to make herself a better musician．
　　Amy drew the most beautiful pictures and wanted to be a fa mous painter one day．She was a favoturite with everyone， except when she complained abut having to wear her cousin's old clothes because her mother could not afford to buy new ones for her．
　　One afternoon a week or two later， Jo went outside to clear the snow away from some of the garden so that Beth could walk there when the sun came out．She looked across to the house next door-a big stone house with lovely things inside that Jo occasionally saw through the open curtains at the windows．But it seemed a lonely， lifeless kind of house， as no children played outside， no motherly face smiled at the windows， and not many people went in and out， except the old gentleman and his grandson．
　　She had not seen the Laurence boy lately and wondered if he was away， but suddenly she saw him looking out of an upstairs window ．She threw up a handful of soft show and called out，'Are you ill？'
　　Laurie opened the window'm almost better， thank you，'he said．'I've had a bad cold．'
　　'What do you find to do？'said Jo．
　　'Nothing，'he said．'They won't let me．'
　　'Why don't you get someone to come and see you？'
　　'I don't know anyone．'
　　'You know us，'said Jo．
　　'So I do！'laughed Laurie．'Will you come，please？'
　　'I'll come if Mother will let me． I'll go and ask her． Shut the window and wait until I come．'
　　Laurie was excited and began to get ready for Jo's visit．He brushed his hair and tried to make his room tidy．Soon after， he heard voices downstairs，then a surprised servant ran up to his room．
　　There's a young lady to see you， sir，'she said．
　　A moment later，Jo appeared with a box in one hand and Beth's three small cats in the other． 'Mother sends her love，'she said．'Meg asked me to bring some of her cake， and Beth thought you would like to play with her cats． Isn't she funny？'
　　Laurie laughed How kind you all are，'he said．
　　'Shall I read to you？'sald Jo．
　　'I'd rather talk，'he said．
　　'I can talk all day，'said Jo，smiling．'Beth says I never know when to stop．'
　　'Is Beth the one who stays at home？'
　　'Yes，that's Beth．She's a good girl．'
　　'The pretty one is Meg，and the curly－haired one is Amy， is that right？' he said．
　　'Yes．How did you know？'
　　Laurie's face became red．'I hear you calling to each other，and you always seem to be having so much fun．Sometimes，in the evenings，you forget to close your curtains and I can see you sitting round the fire with your mother．I haven't got a mother．'
　　Jo saw the sadness in his eyes．'Why don't you come over and see us？ Would your grandfather let you？'
　　'Perhaps，if your mother asked him，'said Laurie．'He spends a lot of time among his books，and Mr Brooke，my tutor，doesn't live here．So I haven't anyone to go out with．Do you like your school？'
　　'I don't go to school．I go out to work-to my aunt's，'said Jo．She described the difficult old lady and made him laugh with her stories． She told him all about her sisters，the plays they acted，and their hopes and fears for their father．Then they talked about books， and Jo discovered that Laurie loved them as much as she did．
　　'Come and see our library，'he said．'Grandfather is out，so you needn't be afraid．'
　　'I 'm not afraid of anything，' replied Jo．
　　He took her down to a room where the walls were covered with books and pictures．
　　'You should be the happiest boy in the world！'said Jo，sitting in a big armchair and looking round．
　　'A person can't live on books，'he said．
　　Suddenly，a bell rang．
　　Jo jumped up out of the chair．It's your grand father！'she said．
　　'What if it is？'said Laurie， with a smile．'You're not afraid of anything， remember？'
　　'Perhaps I am a little bit afraid of him，'said Jo．
　　The servant came in at that moment．'The doctor is here to see you， sir，'she said to Laurie．
　　'Can I leave you for a minute or two， Jo？'he said．
　　'Yes， I'm very happy here，'said Jo．
　　He went away and Jo was staring at a large picture of the old gentleman when the door opened again without turning，she said，'I won't be afraid of him， because he's got kind eyes，although his mouth looks hard and cold．He's not as handsome as my grandfather， but I like him．'
　　'Thank you，'said a deep voice behind her．
　　She turned quickly-and saw old Mr Laurence！
　　Jo's face turned a bright red and she wanted to run away．But the old man's eyes looked kinder than those in the picture and seemed to have a smile in them ．
　　'So you're not afraid of me，eh？'he said．
　　'Not much，sir．'
　　'But I'm not as handsome as your grandfather？'
　　'Not quite，sir．'
　　'But you like me．'He laughed and shook hands with her．
　　'Now，what have you been doing with my grandson？'
　　'Trying to cheer him up， sir，' said Jo．'He seems a bit lonely．'
　　'Then come and have some tea with us．'
　　Laurie was very surprised to see Jo with his grandfather，but was soon talking and laughing happily with Jo．The old man watched the two young people and noticed the change in his grandson．'She's right，'he thought．The boy does need cheering up．'
　　After tea， they went into a room where there was a large and beautiful piano．
　　'Do you play？'Jo asked Laurie．
　　'Sometimes，'he answered．
　　'Play now． I want to hear it so I can tell Beth．'
　　So Laurie played and Jo listened．Afterwards，Mr Laurence said，'He plays quite well，but I want him to do well in more important things． Now， I hope you'll come again．'He shook hands with her．'Goodnight，Jo．'
　　Laurie walked to the door with her．'He doesn't like to hear me play，'he said．
　　'why not？' said Jo．
　　'I'll tell you one day，'he said．
　　When Jo told the family of her afternoon's adventures， they all wanted to go and visit the big house．
　　'Mother，why doesn't Mr Laurence like to hear Laurie play the piano？'asked Jo．
　　'Laurie's father married an Italian lady， a musician，' said Mrs March．'The old man didn't like her， and never saw his son after they were married．Laurie was born in Italy， but his parents died when he was a child，and his grandfather brought him home．Laurie loves music and I expect his grand father is afraid he'll want to be a musician like his mother．'
　　Laurie should be a musician if he wants to be，'said Jo．'Sending him to college will just make him unhappy．'






■ 5 A surprise for Beth
　　Laurie and the four girls were soon great friends． Mr Brooke complained to the old gentleman that his student was always running across to see the Marches．
　　'Let him have a bit of a holiday，'said Mr Laurence．'He can catch up with his studies later．'
　　What good times they had！Writing and acting plays，happy evenings at the Marches， and little parties at the big house．Only Beth was too shy to go there． When Mr Laurence heard about Beth's shyness， he came to have tea with their mother one day，and began to talk about music and great singers he had heard． Beth found it impossible to stay in her corner and came to listen．
　　'Laurie hasn't much time for his music，'Mr Laurence told Mrs March，'so the piano is not used very often．Would any of your girls like to play it sometimes？ They needn't see or speak to anyone，and I'll be in my study．'He got up to go．'But if they don't want to come…'
　　At this moment， a little hand touched his own． It was Beth's． 'I-I want to come，'she said， her voice shaking．'Very much．'
　　'You're the musical girl，'said Mr Laurence， gently．
　　'I'm Beth． Yes，I love music， and I shall come．'
　　The next day， Beth waited until the old and the young gentlemen both went out， then she ran across to the big house and found her way to the room with the beautiful piano．As soon as she began to play， she forgot her fears immediately in the delight which the music gave her．
　　After that， Beth went every day． She never knew that Mr Laurence often opened his study door to hear her playing， or that Laurie stood in the hall to keep the servants away from the shy little girl． But she was so grateful that she asked her mother and sisters to help her make the old gentleman a pair of slippers． After several days careful sewing， the slippers were finished． Then Beth wrote a short letter and， with Laurie's help， left it with the slippers in the old man's study one morning， before he was up．
　　The next day， Beth went out for a walk， and when she came back the others were waiting for her． 'Here's a letter for you， Beth！' they called out．'Come and read it！'She hurried to the house and they took her into the front room．'Look there！' everyone was saying at once． Beth looked-and got the biggest surprise of her life！For there stood a lovely little piano， with a letter on the top of it，addressed to ：' Miss Elizabeth March'．
　　'You-you read it， Jo，' whispered Beth．'I can't．'
　　So Jo opened the letter and began to read．
　　'Dear Miss March，'she read， 'I have had many pairs of slippers but none which have pleased me so much as yours．I should like to thank pou for your kindness by sending you something that once belonged to my little granddaughter，who died．With many thanks． I am your good friend，James Laurence．'
　　Jo put an arm around her sister．'Now try it，Beth，'she said．
　　Beth sat down and began to play， and everyone thought it was the most perfect piano they had ever heard．
　　'You'll have to go and thank him，'said Jo， with a smik，knowing that Beth was much too shy to do anything like that．
　　But Beth surprised them all.'I'll do it at once，' she said bravely， and away she walked， through the garden and into the big house next door．She went up to the old gentleman's study and knocked on the door．
　　'Come in，'said Mr Laurence．
　　Beth went in．'I came to say thank you， sir，'she began，in her quiet little voice． But he looked so friendly that she ran and put both her arms around his neck and kissed him．
　　The old gentleman was so surprised that he nearly fell off his chair． But he was very pleased indeed by that shy little kiss，and soon the two of them were talking like old friends． Later，he walked home with Beth．The girls， watching with great interest from the window， could not believe their eyes．'Well，'Meg said，' I do believe the world is coming to an end！'






■ 6 Amy in trouble
　　'Where are you going？'Amy asked Meg and Jo one afternoon ．'I want to come，too．'
　　'You can't， dear， you're not invited，said Meg．
　　'You're going somewhere with Laurle， I know you are！'
　　'Yes， we are，'said Jo．'Now stop annoying us．'
　　'You're going to the theatre！'Amy said suddenly．'I want to go With you！'
　　'We could take her，I suppose，'began Meg．
　　'No，Laurie only invited us，'said Jo．
　　'I shall go，'shouted Amy．'Meg says I can．'
　　'You just stay where you are！' said Jo， angrily．
　　'I'll make you sorry fof this， Jo March！'Amy shouted，as Meg and Jo left the house．
　　The two older sisters enjoyed themselves at the theatre， but Jo couldn't stop worrying as she wondered what Amy would do to 'make her sorry'．
　　She found out the next afternoon．
　　Beth，Amy and Meg were sitting together when Jo ran into the room．'Has anyone taken my notebook？'Jo asked．
　　Meg and Beth said 'No'at once， but Amy said nothing．
　　'Amy，you've got it，'said Jo．
　　'No，I haven't，' said Amy．
　　'That's a lie！'said Jo．'Tell me the truth， or I'll make you！'
　　'Do what you like，'said Amy．'You'll never see your stupid book again，because I burned it！'
　　Jo's face went white．'What！ But I worked so hard writing my stories！'
　　'I said I'd make you sorry，and I have！'said Amy．
　　Jo jumped at Amy and shook her shoulders．'You wicked，wicked girl！'cried Jo．'I'll never，ever forgive you！'And she ran out of the room．
　　Mrs March came home and heard the story．
　　'Oh， how could you do that， Amy？'she said．'That was Jo's book of stories．She wrote them all herself，and was hoping to make them good enough to print．'
　　Slowly，Amy began to understand the terrible thing she had done， and started to cry．Later，when Jo appeared for tea，Amy begged her sister to forgive her．
　　'I shall never forgive you，'Jo answered．
　　It was not a happy evening， and when singing time came，Jo remained silent． Afterwards， she kissed her mother and said'Goodnight'．
　　'My dear，don't go to bed feeling so angry with your sister，'whispered Mrs March．
　　'I'm sorry，Mother，I can't for give her，'replied Jo，Next day， Jo wanted to get out of the house， so she picked up her skates and went next door to ask Laurie to tske her skating．
　　Amy heard them going．'Jo promised to take me with her next time！'she complained．
　　'It's hard for her to forgive you，Amy，'said Meg．'Go after them and wait until Jo is enjoying herself，then give her a kiss or do something kind．'
　　It was not far to the river，but Jo and Laurie were already skating when Amy arrived．Jo saw Amy but turned away．
　　Laurie was carefully skating along the edge of the ice and didn't see the younger girl．
　　Amy put her skates on and stood on the ice．
　　'Keep near the edge．The ice isn't safe in the middle，'Laurie called to Jo，then he disappeared round the first bend in the river．
　　Jo heard，but Amy did not．Jo realized that Amy probably hadn't heard，but she said nothing and skated after Laurie．'Let Amy look after herself！'Jo thought．
　　Amy skated out towards the smoother ice in the middle of the river．Jo reached the bend，and for a moment she stood still，a strange feeling in her heart．Something made her turn round—just in time to see Amy throw up her hands and go crashing through the ice into the cold water！Amy gave a cry that make Jo's heart stop with fear．She tried to call Laurie，but her voice was gone，and for a second she could only stand and stare at the little blue hood of Amy's coat above the black water．
　　Suddenly，Laurie skated past her and shouted，'Bring a piece of wood from the side of the river，quickly！'
　　Wild with fear，Jo fetched some wood and pulled it across the ice，while Laurie held Amy's head above the water．Together，they got her out．
　　She was more frightened than hurt，and was quickly taken home．They covered her in blankets and tried to calm her，and after a little while she fell asleep in front of the warm fire．Later，when everything was quiet，Jo asked her mother，'Are you sure she s safe？'
　　'Quite safe，dear．It was sensible to get her home as quickly as you did．'
　　'Laurie did it all，'said Jo．'Mother，if she should die，it will be my fault．I get angry so quickly．Oh，why can't I be more like you？'
　　'I get angry nearly every day of my life，Jo，'said Mrs March，'but I've learned not to show it．I've learned to stop myself saying the angry words that come to my lips，and you must try to do the same，my dear．'
　　Amy moved in her sleep and Jo looked at her．'I refused to forgive her，and today，she nearly died！And it was Laurie who saved her．How could I be so wicked？'Jo began to cry．
　　Then Amy opened her eyes and held out her arms，with a smile that went straight to Jo's heart．Neither of them said a word，but they held each other close， and everything was forgiven and forgotten．






■ 7 Meg hears some gossip
　　Annie Moffat did not forget her promised invitation，and one April day Meg went to stay at the Moffats'large house．Meg thought it was wonderful．She loved riding in fine carriages，wearing her best dress every day，and doing nothing except enjoy herself．She soon began to talk about fashionable clothes and hairstyles in the way that the other girls did．And the more Meg saw of Annie's pretty things，the more she wished that she，too，was rich．
　　Annie's older sisters，Belle and Clara，were fine young ladies；Mr Moffat was a fat，friendly gentleman；and Mrs Moffat was a fat，friendly lady．They were all very kind to Meg and did their best to make her feel at home．
　　When the evening for a'small party'came，Meg's best dress looked very old next to Sallie's new one，but no one said anything about it．The girls were getting ready when a servant brought in a box of flowers．
　　'For Miss March，'she said．'And here's a letter．'
　　'What fun！Who are they from？'said the girls．'We didn't know you had a young man．'
　　'The letter is from Mother and the flowers are from Laurie，'said Meg，simply．
　　'Oh，'said Annie，with a strange look．
　　Her mother's loving words and Laurie's kindness made Meg feel much happier and she enjoyed the party very much．
　　Annie made her sing，and someone said that Meg had a fine voice．So Meg was having a nice time—until she heard some one say，on the other side of a large table of flowers：'How old is the Laurence boy？'
　　'Sixteen or seventeen，I think，'said another voice．
　　'It would be an excellent thing for one of those girls，'said a third voice．'Sallie says they are very friendly，and the old man thinks they are all wonderful．'
　　'I expect Mrs M．has made her plans，'said Mrs Moffat's voice，'but do you think the girl knows of them？'
　　'She told that little lie about her mother，and her cheeks went pink．I'm sure the note was from the boy really．Poor thing！She'd be very pretty if she had some nice clothes．Do you think she'll mind if we offer to lend her a dress for Thursday？'
　　'I shall ask young Laurence to come，and we'll have some fun with her afterwards．'
　　Meg tried to forget what she'd heard，but could not．The gossip made her angry，and she was glad when the party was over and she was alone in her bed．She cried quietly to herself．Why did people have to say those things？She and Laurie were just friends，but now that friendship felt damaged by the unkind gossip．
　　The next day，Miss Belle said，'Meg，dear，we've sent an invitation to your friend，Mr Laurence，for Thursday．'
　　Meg pretended to misunderstand．'You're very kind，but I'm afraid he won't come．He's nearly seventy．'
　　Miss Belle laughed．'I mean the young man．'
　　'There isn't one，'said Meg．'Laurie is only a boy．'
　　'Isn't he about your age？'said Clara．
　　'Nearer Jo's，'said Meg．'I'm seventeen in August．'
　　'It's nice of him to send you flowers，'said Annie．
　　'He often does，to all of us，'said Meg．'My mother and old Mr Laurence are friends，you know．'
　　'What will you wear on Thursday？'asked Sallie．
　　'My white dress again，I haven't got any others．'
　　'No others？'said Sallie．'How funny—'
　　'I have a pretty blue dress I can't wear any more，Meg，'said Belle．'It will please me if you wear it．'
　　'You're very kind，but—，'began Meg．
　　'Please，do，'said Belle．'You'll look quite beautiful in it．'
　　Meg couldn't refuse this kind offer and，on the Thursday evening，Belle helped to change Meg into a fine lady．She brushed and curled her hair，reddened her lips，then helped her to get into the sky-blue dress．The neck of the dress was cut very low，and Meg was quite shocked when she saw herself in the mirror．A necklace and earrings were added，and Meg was ready for the party．
　　At first，she felt strange in all the fine clothes，but she soon discovered that people who did not usually notice her now came to speak to her．Several young men who had only stared before now asked to be introduced．
　　Suddenly，Meg saw Laurie across the room．He was staring at her，and he didn't look very pleased．Meg began to feel uncomfortable，and she wished that she had worn her old dress．As she walked up to Laurie，she saw Belle and Annie watching them both and smiling．
　　'I'm glad you came，'Meg said to Laurie，in her most grown-up voice．'I was afraid you wouldn't．'
　　'Jo wanted me to come and tell her how you looked，'said Laurie．
　　'What will you tell her？'
　　'1'll say I didn't know you，because you look so unlike yourself．I'm quite afraid of you，'he said．
　　'The girls dressed me up for fun，'said Meg．'Don't you like it？'
　　'No，I don't，'came the cool reply．
　　Meg became angry．'Then I shan't stay with you！'And she walked off towards the window．
　　A moment or two later，an older man went past her and she heard him say to his friend，'That girl has been dressed up like a doll．'
　　'Oh dear，'thought Meg．'Why didn't I wear my own things？'
　　She turned and saw Laurie behind her．'Please forgive me，'he said．'Come and have something to eat．'
　　Meg tried to look annoyed．
　　'Please come，'he said again．'I don't like your dress，but I do think you are—wonderful．'
　　Meg smiled and found it impossible to stay angry with him．'Please don't tell them at home about my dress，'she said．'They won't understand that it was just for fun，and it will worry Mother．I was stupid to wear it，but I'll tell them myself．'
　　'I won't say anything，'he promised．
　　He did not see her again until supper time，when she was drinking wine with two other boys．
　　'You'll feel ill tomorrow，if you drink much of that，Meg，'Laurie whispered to her．
　　'I'm not Meg tonight，'she said．'I'm a doll who does crazy things．Tomorrow，I'll be good again．'
　　Meg danced and laughed and talked to as many young men as she could manage，but went to bed feeling that she hadn't enjoyed herself as much as she had expected．
　　She was sick all the next day， and on Saturday went home，quite tired of her fortnight's fun．
　　'I'm glad to be home，'she said to her mother and Jo，after telling them how she was dressed up like a doll，drank too much wine，and was ill afterwards．She had laughed while telling them the story，but her face still looked worried at the end．
　　'There is something else，I think，'said Mrs March，smoothing Meg' s cheek，which suddenly became rose-red．
　　'Yes，'Meg said slowly．'I hate people saying and thinking awful things about us and Laurie．'Then she told them the gossip she had heard．
　　'What rubbish！'said Jo．'Just wait until I see Annie Moffat！How stupid to think that Mother has “plans”，and that we are kind to Laurie because he is rich and may marry one of us one day．He'll laugh when I tell him！'
　　'No，Jo，'said her mother．'You must never repeat wicked gossip．
　　'Do you have “plans”，Mother？'asked Meg．
　　'All mothers do，dear，'said Mrs March．'But my plans are different from Mrs Moffat's，I suspect．I want my daughters to be loved，and I want people to think well of them．I want them to marry well，but not to marry rich men just because they are rich．I'd rather you were poor men's wives，if that meant you had happy，peaceful lives．But your father and I believe that we'll always be proud of our daughters，whether they are married or single．'
　　'You will，you will！said Meg and Jo，together．






■ 8 All play and no work
　　'The first of June，and the King family is going on holiday tomorrow！'said Meg．'I'm free for three months！'
　　'And Aunt March went away for her holiday today，'said Jo．'Isn't life wonderful！'
　　'What will you do all your holiday？'asked Amy．
　　'I'll stay in bed late，and do nothing，'said Meg．
　　'I have lots of books to read，'said Jo．
　　'Let's not do any studying，Beth，'said Amy．'Let's play all the time，and rest，as Jo and Meg are going to do．'
　　'I will if Mother doesn't mind，'said Beth．
　　Mrs March agreed to the plan and said they could try it for a week．
　　'But，'she added，'I think by Saturday night you will find that all play and no work is as bad as all work and no play．'
　　Next day，Meg appeared at ten o'clock and ate breakfast alone．It was a lonely meal and the room was untidy，because Beth had not cleaned it．
　　Jo went to the river with Laurie，then sat in the apple tree and read a book Beth began to tidy things in her cupboard，but she got tired and left it half-done．She went to her piano，glad that she did not have to wash the cups and plates．Amy sat in the garden to draw，hoping someone would see her and say something nice about her picture．But no one appeared，so she went for a walk，got caught in the rain and came home very wet．
　　At tea，everyone said that it had been a delightful but unusually long day．Meg，who had been shopping in the afternoon，now decided that she did not like the dress she had bought．Jo had a headache from reading too long．Beth couldn't find anything in her cupboard，and the rain had made Amy's dress so wet that she couldn't wear it to Katy Brown's party the next day．
　　Mrs March listened，smiled and said nothing．
　　The week seemed to get longer and longer with nothing much to do，and by Friday the girls were glad that it was nearly over．Then Mrs March gave Hannah a holiday，and when the girls got up on Saturday，there was no breakfast ready，no fire in the kitchen，and no mother waiting for them．
　　'What has happened？'said Jo．
　　Meg ran upstairs，then came down to say that Mother was staying in her room to have a rest．'She says we must look after ourselves today，'Meg said．
　　'Good，I want something to do，'said Jo．
　　Secretly，they were all pleased to have something useful to do again．Beth and Amy put cups and plates on the table while Jo and Meg got the breakfast，then Meg took some tea and an egg up to Mrs March．The tea was too strong and the egg wasburned．Mrs March did not complain，but she laughed to herself afterwards．
　　Jo decided to invite Laurie to dinner．'There's meat and vegetables and plenty of potatoes，'she told Meg，'and we can have strawberries，and then coffee．' Her mother said she did not mind at all because she was going out for dinner．
　　Jo did her best，but the potatoes were still hard in the middle，the vegetables were cooked too long and fell to pieces，and the meat was burned black．The strawberries were not ready for eating，and she put salt on them instead of sugar！Unfortunately，this was not discovered until Laurie began eating them．He pretended everything was all right，but Amy took a spoonful and ran from the table．
　　'What's wrong？'said Jo．
　　Meg and Laurie told her．'Oh，no！'said Jo．Then she saw Laurie start to smile，and she began to laugh．Soon everyone was laughing with her．
　　'What a terrible day！'said Jo，after they had cleared everything away．
　　Mrs March returned home later．'Have you enjoyed your week of all play and no work，girls，or do you want another week of it？'she said．
　　'I don't！'said Jo．
　　'Nor do I！'shouted the others．
　　'Mother，did you go out and leave us just to see how we would manage？asked Meg．
　　'Yes，'said Mrs March．'I wanted you to see that being comfortable depends on us all helping each other and not just thinking of ourselves．Isn't it better to have time for play and time for work，and to make each day useful and enjoyable？'
　　'Oh，it is，Mother，it is！'said the girls．
　　Some days later，all four girls went on a picnic with Laurie and his tutor，Mr Brooke，and some other young people．Sallie Gardiner and her English friend，Miss Kate Vaughn，were among them．It was a sunny day and they had their picnic on a hill，under some trees．
　　After the meal，most of the young ladies and gentlemen played games，but Miss Kate sat under a tree and began to draw．Meg watched，while Mr Brooke lay on the grass beside her，with a book which he did not read．
　　'I wish I could draw，'said Meg．
　　'Why don't you learn？'replied Miss Kate．She was a little older than the other girls and was very much the fashionable young lady．
　　'I haven't time，'said Meg．'I have a job，teaching four children in a family．'
　　'Oh！'said Miss Kate，looking rather shocked．She said no more，but her face showed that she thought being a private teacher was little better than being a servant，and Meg's cheeks quickly became red．
　　'In America，young ladies prefer to work and earn money for themselves，'said Mr Brooke quickly，'and not expect others to pay for everything．'
　　'I see，'said Miss Kate，coldly．Soon after，she took her drawing and moved away．
　　'There's no place like America for us workers，Miss Meg，'said Mr Brooke，smiling．His brown eyes looked at Meg warmly，and she smiled back at him．
　　'I wish I liked teaching as much as you do，she said．
　　'You would if you were teaching Laurie，'said Mr Brooke．'I'll be sorry when he goes to college next year．But then I shall become a soldier．'
　　'I think every young man wants to be a soldier，'said Meg，'but it's hard for the family who stay at home．'
　　'I have no family，and not many friends to care if I live or die，'said Mr Brooke，sadly．
　　'Laurie and his grandfather would care，'said Meg，'and we would all be very sorry if anything happened to you．'
　　'Thank you，'said Mr Brooke，cheering up immediately．






■ 9 Secrets
　　One October afternoon，Jo caught a bus into the town and stopped outside a building in one of the busy streets．She went in，looked up the stairs and，after a minute，ran out again．She did this several times，to the great amusement of a young man who was watching from the opposite side of the road．But the fourth time，Jo gave herself a shake and walked up the stairs．
　　The young man crossed the road and waited．It was Laurie．Ten minutes later，Jo came running out，but did not look pleased to see him．
　　'What are you doing here？'she said．
　　'I'm waiting to walk home with you，'he said．'I've a secret to tell you，but first you must tell me yours．'
　　'You won't say anything at home，will you？'said Jo．
　　'Not a word，promised Laurie．
　　'I've left two of my stories with a newspaper man，'said Jo，'but I'll have to wait until next week before I know if they will be printed．'
　　'Miss March，the famous American writer！'said Laurie，throwing his hat into the air and catching it．
　　Jo looked pleased．'Now，what's your secret？'
　　'You remember Meg lost a glove at the picnic？'said Laurie．'Well，I know where it is．'
　　'Is that all？'said Jo，looking disappointed．
　　'Wait until I tell you where it is，'he said．
　　'Tell me then，'said Jo．
　　Laurie whispered three words in Jo's ear．
　　She stared at him，looking both surprised and displeased．'How do you know？'
　　'I saw it．'
　　'Where？' asked Jo．
　　'Pocket．What's wrong，don't you like it？'
　　'Of course not．It's stupid！What would Meg say if she knew？'
　　'You mustn't tell anyone，'said Laurie．
　　'I didn't promise，'Jo reminded him．
　　'I thought you would be pleased，'he said．
　　'Pleased at the idea of someone coming to take Meg away？'said Jo．'No，thank you．'
　　She ran off down the hill，but Laurie came after her and reached the bottom first．She came up behind him，her face red and her hair blowing in the wind．
　　'That was fun！'she said，forgetting her crossness in the enjoyment of a good run．
　　At that moment，someone passed by，then stopped and looked back．It was Meg．
　　'What are you doing here？'she said when she saw Jo．'You've been running，haven't you？Jo，when will you start to behave like a young lady？'
　　'Don't make me grow up yet，Meg，'said Jo，looking sad．'It's hard enough having you change so suddenly．'
　　Meg was growing into a woman，and Laurie's secret made Jo realize that Meg would leave home one day，perhaps soon．
　　Two Saturdays after Jo had gone secretly into town，Meg saw Laurie chasing Jo all over the garden before the two of them fell on the grass，laughing and waving a newspaper．
　　'What can we do with that girl？'said Meg．'She never will behave like a young lady．'
　　Minutes later，Jo came in with the newspaper．She sat down and began to read it．
　　'Are you reading anything interesting？'asked Meg．
　　'Only a story，'said Jo．
　　'Read it aloud，'said Amy．'It may amuse us．'
　　Jo began to read very fast，and the girls listened．It was a love story about two people called Viola and Angelo，and most of the characters died in the end But the girls enjoyed it，and Meg even cried a little at the sad parts．
　　'Who wrote it？'asked Beth，watching Jo's face．
　　Jo put down the newspaper．'I did，'she said，her eyes bright and shining．
　　'You？'said Meg，surprised．
　　'It's very good，'said Amy．
　　'I knew it！'said Beth．She ran across and put her arms around her sister．'Oh，Jo，I am so proud！'
　　And how proud Mrs March was when she was told．
　　Everyone began to speak at the same time．'Tell us all about it．''How much did you get for it？''What will Father say？''Won't Laurie laugh！'
　　So Jo told them all about it，and that evening there was no happier or prouder family that the Marches．






■ 10 A telegram
　　Mrs March，the girls and Laurie were sitting together on a dull November afternoon when Hannah hurried into the room with a telegram Mrs March read it，then dropped it to the floor，her face white and her hands shaking．Jo picked up the telegram and read it to the others in a frightened voice．Mrs March：Your husband is very ill．Come at once．S．
　　Hale，Blank Hospital，Washington．
　　The girls moved close to their mother．All their happiness had disappeared in a moment．
　　'I shall go at once，'said Mrs March，'but it may be too late．Oh，my children！'
　　For several minutes，there was only the sound of crying，then Hannah hurried away to get things ready for the long journey．
　　'Where's Laurie？'Mrs March asked．
　　'Here，'said the boy．'Oh，let me do something！'
　　'Send a telegram and say that I'll come at once，'said Mrs March．'The next train goes early in the morning． Now，I must write a note to Aunt March Jo，give me that pen and paper．
　　Jo knew that the money for the journey must be borrowed from Aunt March，and she too wanted to do something—anything—to help her father．
　　Laurie went off to take the note to Aunt March and to send the telegram．Jo went to fetch some things from the shops，and Amy and Meg helped their mother to get ready．
　　'Father will need good food and wine to help him get better，and there won't be much at the hospital，'said Mrs March．'Beth，go and ask Mr Laurence for a couple of bottles of wine．I'm not too proud to beg for Father．'
　　Mr Laurence came back with Beth．He offered to go with Mrs March，but she wouldn't let the old gentleman make the long，tiring journey，although he could see that she would like to have somebody with her．He went away again，saying，'I'll be back．
　　Soon after，Meg saw Mr Brooke by the door．
　　'I'm very sorry to hear your news，Miss March，'he said gently．'Mr Laurence and I think it will be a good idea if I travel with your mother．'
　　'How kind you all are！'said Meg．'It will be so good to know that there is someone to take care of Mother．Thank you very much！'She put out her hand and smiled gratefully up into his warm brown eyes．
　　Laurie came back with a letter and money from Aunt March，but Jo did not return．It was late afternoon when she came walking in and gave her mother some money．
　　'That's to help make Father comfortable and to bring him home，'she said．
　　'Twenty-five dollars！'said Mrs March．'My dear，where did you get it？'
　　Jo took off her hat．
　　'Your hair，your beautiful hair！'cried Amy．
　　All Jo's lovely，thick，long hair was cut short．
　　'Jo，how could you？'cried Meg．
　　'My dear girl，there was no need for this，'said Mrs March．
　　'She doesn't look like my Jo，but I love her dearly for doing it！'said Beth，and began to cry．
　　'Don't cry，Beth，'said Jo．'I wanted to do something for Father，and selling my hair was the only thing I could think of doing．I'll soon have a curly head again，which will be short and easy to keep tidy．'
　　But later，when Amy and Beth were asleep and Meg was lying awake， she heard Jo crying．
　　'Are you crying about Father，Jo？'she asked．
　　'No，not now．It's my hair，'cried Jo．'I'd do it again， if I could．But I did love my hair，and the selfish bit of me is making me cry．Don't tell anyone．I'll be all right in the morning．'
　　During the days after their mother and Mr Brooke went away，Meg aud Jo went back to their jobs，and Beth and Amy helped Hannah to keep the house tidy．Everyone tried very hard to be good and hard-working and helpful．
　　News of their father came through，at first telling them he was dangerously ill，but then saying he was slowly getting better．






■ 11 Beth
　　Ten days after their mother went away，Beth came home late after one of several visits to a sick baby at the Hummels'house．She went straight to her mother's room and shut herself inside．Half an hour later，Jo found her sitting there，looking very ill．
　　'Beth，what's the matter？'cried Jo．
　　Beth put out a hand to keep her away．'You've had scarlet fever，haven't you？she said．
　　'Years ago，when Meg did，'said Jo．'Why？'
　　'Oh，Jo！Mrs Hummel's baby is dead，'said Beth．'It died in my arms before Mrs Hummel got home．'
　　'My poor Beth，how awful for you！'said Jo，putting an arm around her sister．'What did you do？'
　　'I just sat and held it until Mrs Hummel came with the doctor．He looked at Heinrich and Minna who were also feeling sick．“It's scarlet fever，”he said．Then he told me to come home and take some medicine quickly or I would catch it，too．'
　　'I'll fetch Hannah，'said Jo．
　　'Don't let Amy come，'said Beth．'She hasn't had it，and I don't want to give it to her．'
　　It was decided that Amy must go to Aunt March's house，so Laurie took her there．Poor Amy did not like this plan at all and only agreed to go when Laurie said he would visit her every day to bring her news of Beth．
　　When Laurie got back，he asked Jo and Meg if he ought to send a telegram to Mrs March．
　　'Hannah says Mother can't leave Father and would only worry，'said Meg．'She says Beth won't be sick long，and that she knows what to do，but it doesn't seem right．'
　　Mr Laurence was not allowed to see Beth，and Meg felt unhappy writing letters to her mother saying nothing about Beth's illness．Jo nursed Beth night and day，but the time came when Beth did not know her and called for her mother．Jo was frightened，and Meg begged to be allowed to write the truth，but Hannah said there was no danger yet．Then a letter came saying that Mr March was worse and could not think of coming home for a long time．
　　How dark the days seemed．How sad and lonely The sisters worked and waited as the shadow of death lay over the once happy home．It was then that Meg realized how rich she had been in the things which really mattered—love，peace，good health．And Jo，watching her little sister，thought about how unselfish Beth always was—living for others and trying to make home a happy place for all who came there．Amy，sad and lonely at Aunt March's house，just wanted to come home so that she could do something to help Beth．
　　On the first day of December，the doctor came in the morning．He looked at Beth，then said quietly，'If Mrs March can leave her husband，I think she should come home now．'
　　Jo threw on her coat and ran out into the snow to send a telegram．When she arrived back，Laurie came with a letter saying that Mr March was getting better again．This was good news，but Jo's face was so unhappy that Laurie asked， What is it？Is Beth worse？
　　'I've sent for Mother，'said Jo，beginning to cry．'Beth doesn't know us any more．'
　　Laurie held her hand and whispered，'I'm here，Jo．Hold on to me．Your mother will be here soon，and then everything will be all right．'
　　'I'm glad Father is better，'said Jo．'Now Mother won't feel so bad about coming home．'
　　'You're very tired，'said Laurie．'But I'll tell you something to cheer you up better than anything．'
　　'What is it？'said Jo．
　　Laurie smiled．'I sent a telegram to your mother yesterday，and Mr Brooke answered that she'd come at once．She'll be here tonight and everything will be all right！'
　　Jo threw her arms around him．'Oh，Laurie！Oh，Mother！I am so glad！'She did not cry again，but held on to her friend．He was surprised，but he smoothed her hair and followed this with a kiss or two．
　　Jo pushed him gently away．'Oh，don't！I didn't mean—！'
　　'I enjoyed it！'laughed Laurie，then，went on，'Grandfather and I thought your mother ought to know．She wouldn't forgive us if Beth—well，if anything happened．Her train will be in at two o'clock in the morning，and I'll meet her．'
　　All that day，the snow fell and the hours went slowly by．The doctor came，then said he would come back after midnight when he expected there to be some change in Beth's condition，for better or worse．Hannah fell asleep in a chair beside Beth's bed．Mr Laurence waited downstairs，while Laurie lay on the floor pretending to rest．The girls just waited，unable to sleep．
　　At twelve o'clock，a change seemed to pass over Beth's face．Hannah slept on，but the girls saw the shadow which seemed to fall upon the little bed．An hour went by and Laurie left quietly for the station．
　　At two o'clock，Jo was standing at the window，watching the snow．She heard something and turned to see Meg kneeling beside her mother's chair．A cold feeling of fear passed over Jo．'Beth is dead，'she thought．
　　She ran to the bed．The pain had gone from Beth's face，and now there was a look of peace instead．Jo kissed her and softly whispered，'Goodbye，Beth，goodbye！'
　　Hannah woke up and looked at Beth．'The fever's gone！'she cried．'She's sleeping and breathing easily！'
　　The doctor came soon after．'I think she'll be all right，'he said．'Keep the house quiet and let her sleep．'
　　Meg and Jo held each other close，their hearts too full for words．Beth was lying as she used to，with her cheek on her hand，and breathing quietly．
　　'I wish Mother would come now，'whispered Jo．
　　And a moment later，they heard the sound of the door below，a cry from Hannah，then Laurie's happy voice saying，'Girls，she's come！She's come！'






■ 12 Love and Mr Brooke
　　When Beth woke from her long sleep，she looked into her mother's face and smiled．Then she slept again，but Mrs March held on to her daughter's thin little hand．
　　Hannah made breakfast while Meg and Jo listened as their mother told them about their father's health，and Mr Brooke's promise to stay with him．Then Meg and Jo closed their tired eyes and were able to rest at last．
　　Laurie went to give the good news to Amy at Aunt March's house． He， too， was tired after the long night， and just man-aged to finish telling his story before he fell asleep in the chair．Amy began to write a short letter to her mother， but before she could finish it， she saw Mrs March coming towards her aunt's house！Amy ran to meet her．
　　There were probably many happy little girls in the city that day，but Amy was the happiest of them all as she sat on her mother's knee．'I've been thinking a lot about Beth，'she said．'Everyone loves her because she isn't selfish．People wouldn't feel half so bad about me if I was sick， but I'd like to be loved and missed．I'm going to try and be like Beth as much as I can．'
　　Her mother kissed her．'I'm sure you will succeed，'she said．'Now I must go back to Beth． Be patient， little daughter， and we'll soon have you home again．'That evening， while Meg was writing to her father， Jo went upstairs to Beth's room and found her mother beside the bed，as the little girl slept．
　　'I want to tell you something， Mother，'said Jo．
　　'Is it about Meg？'said Mrs March．
　　'How quickly you guessed！'said Jo．'Yes， it's about her．Last summer，Meg lost one of her gloves at the Laurences'picnic，and later Laurie told me that Mr Brooke had it，and kept it in his coat pocket． It fell out once， and Laurie saw it．Mr Brooke told Laurie that he liked Meg but was afraid to tell her because she was so young and he was so poor． Isn't it all awful？'
　　'Do you think Meg likes and cares about him？'asked Mrs March，with a worried look．
　　'I don t know anything about love！'said Jo．
　　'Do you think she's not in interested in John？'said Mrs March．
　　'Who？'said Jo， staring．
　　'Mr Brooke，' said her mother．'I call him John because we became good friends at the hospital．'
　　'Oh，dear！' said Jo．'He's been good to Father， and nowyou'll let Meg marry him，if she wants to．'
　　'My dear，don't be angry，' said Mrs March．'John told us quite honestly that he loved Meg， but said he would earn enough money for a comfortable home before he asked her to marry him． He wants very much to make her love him if hecan．He's an excellent young man，but your father and I will not agree to Meg marrying before she is twenty．'
　　'I want her to marry Laurie， and be rich，' said Jo．'I'm afraid Laurie isn't grown-up enough for Meg，' said Mrs March．'Don't make plans， Jo．Let time and their own hearts bring your friends together．'
　　Meg came in with the letter for her father．
　　'Beautifully written，my dear，'said her mother，looking at the letter．'Please add that I send my love to John．''Do you call him John？'said Meg，smiling．
　　'Yes， he's been like a son to us and we are very fond ofhim，'said Mrs March，watching her daughter closely．
　　'I'm glad of that， because he's so lonely，'was Meg's qui-et answer．'Goodnight，Mother dear．'
　　Mrs March kissed her gently．'She does not love John yet，'she thought，'but she will soon learn to．'






■ 13 Laurie makes trouble and Jo makes peace
　　Laurie quickly realized that Jo was keeping a secret which she refused to tell him，but he guessed the secret was about Meg and Mr Brooke， and was annoyed that his tutor had said nothing．He began to make some private plans of his own．
　　Meg，meanwhile，was busy getting things ready for her father's return， but a change suddenly seemed to come over her．For a day or two，she jumped when she was spoken to，and there was a worried look on her face．
　　Then a letter arrived for her， and a few minutes later Mrs March and Jo saw Meg staring at it with a frightened face．'My child，what is it？'said Mrs March．
　　'It's a mistake-he didn't send it．Jo， how could you do it？'Meg hid her face in her hands and cried．
　　'Me？I've done nothing，'said Jo．'What's she talking about？'
　　Meg pulled another letter from her pocket and threw it at Jo．'You wrote it， and that bad boy helped you． How could you be so cruel and mean to us both？'
　　Jo and her mother read the letter which had been in Meg's pocket．
　　My dearest Meg，I can no longer hide my love for you，and must know your answer before I return．I cannot tellyour parents yet， but I think they will agree if they know that we love one another．Mr Laurence will help me find a good job，and then， my sweet girl， you will make me happy．Say nothing to your family yet， but send a word of hope tome through Laurie．Your loving John．
　　'That terrible boy！'said Jo．'I'll make him sorry．'
　　But her mother said，'Wait，Jo．Are you sure this is nothing to do with you？'
　　'I never saw the letter before！'said Jo．'But Mr Brooke wouldn't write stupid things like that．'
　　'It's like his writing，'said Meg unhappily， looking at the second letter in her hand．
　　'Oh，Meg，you didn't answer it？'said Mrs March．
　　'Yes，I did！'cried Meg，hiding her face again．
　　'Let me get that wicked boy！'shouted Jo．
　　Mrs March sat beside Meg．'Tell me everything．'
　　'Laurie brought the first letter，'said Meg．'He didn't seem to know anything about it． I was going to tell you， but I remembered how you liked Mr Brooke and thought it would be all right to keep my little secret for a while．Now I can never look him in the face again．'
　　'What did you write to him？'asked Mrs March．
　　'I only said that I was too young to do anything，and that I didn't wish to have secrets from you so he must speak to Father．I thanked him for his kindness and said I would be his friend，but nothing more，for a long time．'Mrs March smiled and looked pleased．
　　Jo laughed．'What did he reply to that？'
　　'He writes here that he never sent any love letter， and is sorry that my sister Jo should play games with us like this，'said Meg．'It's a very kind letter， but imagine how awful I feel．'
　　'I don't believe Brooke saw either of those letters，'said Jo．'Laurie wrote them both and he's keeping yours because I won't tell him my secret．'
　　'Go and fetch Laurie，Jo，'said Mrs March．'I'll put a stop to all this at once．'
　　Away ran Jo，and Mrs March gently told Meg Mr Brooke's real feelings．'Now，dear， do you love him enough to wait until he can make a home for you？'
　　'I'm frightened and worried，'answered Meg．'I don't want anything to do with love for a long time-perhaps never．If John doesn't know about all this， don't tell him， and please make Jo and Laurie keep quiet．'
　　Mrs March tried to calm her daughter， but as soon as Meg heard Laurie coming back with Jo， she ran out of the room，and Mrs March saw the boy alone． When Laurie saw Mrs March's angry face，he guessed the reason．Jo waited outside the room as，inside，the voices rose and fell for half an hour．But the girls never knew what was said．
　　When they were called in，Laurie apologized to Meg，and told her that Mr Brooke knew nothing about either of the two letters．'Please forgive me，Meg，'he said．
　　'I'll try，'said Meg，'but I didn't think you could be so unkind．'
　　Laurie looked so sorry that Jo wanted to forgive him straight away，but she said nothing and refused even to look at him．When he went away，looking hurt and unhappy，Jo wished she had been more forgiving．She could never stay angry for long，so after a while she hurried over to the big house，taking with her as an excuse one of Mr Laurence's books that she had borrowed．
　　'Is Mr Laurence in？'Jo asked a servant．
　　'Yes，miss， but you can't see him，'said the servant．'Why？Is he ill？'said Jo．
　　'No，miss，but he's been arguing with Mr Laurie．''Where's Laurie？'said Jo．
　　'He's shut in his room，and he won't come out．''I'll go and see what's the matter，'said Jo．'I'm not afraid of either of them．'
　　She went upstairs and knocked on Laurie's door．
　　'Stop that！' shouted Laurie．
　　Jo immediately knocked again and the door flew open．She stepped inside before Laurie could stop her．'I've come to say that I forgive you，'she said，'and I won't stay angry with you．'
　　'Oh，'said Laurie．'Thank you．'
　　'What's wrong？'she said， seeing his unhappy face．'I wouldn't tell Grandfather why your mother wanted to see me， because I promised her not to tell anyone，' he said．'But then Grandfather tried to shake the truth out of me，so I came up here and shut myself in．'
　　'I expect he's sorry he did that，'said Jo．'Go down and say you're sorry．I'll help you．'
　　'No，I won't！'said Laurie angrily．'I was sorry about Meg，and I asked her to forgive me，but I won't do it again when I'm not the one who is wrong．He ought to believe me when I say I can't tell him something．I don't like being shaken like that，and I won't go down until he apologizes．''Listen，if I get your grandfather to apologize for shaking you，will you go down？'said Jo．
　　'Yes， but you won't do it，'answered Laurie．
　　'If I can manage the young one，then I can manage the old one，'Jo said to herself as she went downstairs．
　　'Come in！'said Mr Laurence， when she knocked on his door．
　　'It's me， sir，' said Jo．'I'm returning a book．''Do you want any more？'said the old man， looking annoyed but trying not to show it．
　　'Yes，please，'said Jo．And she pretended to look for an-other book while Mr Laurence stared at her crossly．
　　'What's that boy been doing？'he asked suddenly．'He won't tell me．'
　　'He did do something wrong and we forgave him，'said Jo，'but we all promised not to say a word to anyone．''He must not hide behind a promise from you soft-hearted girls，'said the old gentleman．'Tell me，Jo．'
　　'I can't，sir， because Mother has ordered me not to，'said Jo．'And if I tell you，it will make trouble for someone else，not Laurie．'
　　This seemed to calm the old man．'Then I'll forgive him，'
　　he said after a moment．'He's a difficult boy and hard to manage，you know．'
　　'So am I，'said Jo，'but a kind word always helps．'
　　'You think I'm not kind to him？'he said sharply．
　　'Too kind，very often，'said Jo，a little afraid，'but just a bit quick to be angry with him sometimes．'
　　The old gentleman looked a little ashamed．'You're right， I am．Although I love the boy， I find it hard to be patient with him sometimes．Bring him down and tell him it's all right． I'm sorry I shook him．'
　　'Why not write him an apology，sir？'said Jo．'He says he won't come down until he's got one．'
　　Mr Laurence gave her another sharp look，but then smiled and put on his glasses．'Here， give me a bit of paper，' he said．
　　The words were written and Jo kissed the old man's cheek．
　　Then she went upstairs and put the letter under Laurie's door．But he came out before she was gone．
　　'Well done，Jo，'he said．'Did he shout at you？'
　　'No，he was quite calm，'said Jo．'Now， go and eat your dinner．You'll both feel better after it．'
　　Everyone thought the matter was ended，but although others forgot it，Meg remembered．She never talked about Laurie's tutor but she thought of him often and dreamed her dreams．And once，when Jo was looking for something in her sister's desk，she found a bit of paper with'Mrs John Brooke written on it over and over again．
　　'Oh， dear！'said Jo．






■ 14 Happier days
　　Christmas Day was very different that year．Beth felt much better and was carried to the window to see the snowman which Jo and Laurie had made．It had a basket of fruit and flowers in one hand and a new piece of music in the other．Laurie ran up and down，bringing in the presents， and Jo sang a funny song．
　　'I'm so happy！'laughed Beth，as Jo carried her back to the other room to rest after the fun．'Oh，I do wish that Father was here too！'
　　Half an hour later，Laurie came to the house and opened the door quietly．'Here's another Christmas present for the March family！'he called out．
　　He moved away，and in his place appeared a tall man holding the arm of another tall man，who tried to say something but couldn't．
　　'Father！'cried Meg and Jo together-and Mr March disappeared under lots of loving arms and kisses．Mr Brooke kissed Meg-by mistake，as he tried to explain．
　　Suddenly， the door to the other room opened， and there was Beth， running straight into her father's arms．There were tears of happiness on many faces before all the excitement died down．Then Mrs March thanked Mr Brooke for taking care ofher husband，and he and Laurie left the family to themselves．
　　Mr March and Beth sat in one big armchair， and the others sat around them．'I wanted to surprise you all，and the doctor let Mr Brooke bring me home，'said Mr March．'John has been so good to me．He is an excellent young man．'Mr March looked at Meg， who was staring at the fire， then he smiled at his wife．She smiled back．Jo understood exactly what the smiles were saying， and went out to the kitchen complaining to herself about 'excellent young men with brown eyes！'
　　There never was a Christmas dinner like the one they had that day． Mr Laurence and his grandson ate with them， and so did Mr Brooke．Jo gave the tutor many black looks and would not speak to him， which amused Laurie．
　　The guests left early and the happy family sat together around the fire．
　　'A year ago we were complaining about the awful Christmas we expected to have，do you remember？'said Jo．
　　'It's been quite a good year，'said Meg， thinking about Mr Brooke．
　　'I think it's been a hard one，'said Amy．
　　'I'm glad it's over， because we've got Father back，'whispered Beth，who was sitting on his knee．
　　'I've discovered several things about you young ladies today，'said Mr March．
　　'Oh，tell us what they are！'cried Meg．
　　'Here's one，'he said， taking her hand． It had a small burnon the back and two or three little hard places on the front．'I remember when this hand was white and smooth．It was pretty then， but to me it's much prettier now．I'm proud of this hard-working hand，Meg．'
　　'What about Jo？'whispered Beth．'She's tried so hard，and has been very， very good to me．'
　　He smiled and looked at Jo sitting opposite．'Her hair maybe short，but I see a young lady now． Her face is thin and white from worrying， but it has grown gentler．Perhaps I'll miss my wild girl，but I'm sure I'll love the warm-hearted woman who has taken her place．'
　　Jo's face was red in the firelight as she listened．
　　'Now Beth，'said Amy．
　　'She's not as shy as she used to be，'said her father lovingly，and he held Beth close when he remembered how near they had come to losing her． Then he looked down at Amy by his feet．'I've noticed today that Amy has helped everyone patiently and with a smile．She's learned to think more about other people，and less about herself．'
　　Beth moved out of her father's arms and went to the piano．She touched the keys softly and began to sing．Soon， the others joined her in a happy Christmas song．
　　The next afternoon，Jo and Meg were sitting at the window when Laurie went by． When he saw Meg， he fell on one knee in the snow， beat his chest， and put out his arms towards her．When Meg told him to go away，he pretended to cry before walking away looking miserable．
　　Meg laughed．'What was he doing？'she said．
　　'He was showing you how your John will act，'answered Jo，crossly．
　　'Don't say my John，it isn't right．'But Meg said the words again silently inside her head．
　　'If he asks yon to marry him，you'll cry or look stupid，in-stead of saying a loud No，'said Jo．
　　'No，I won't，'said Meg．'I'll say，“Thank you，Mr Brooke，you are very kind，but I am too young to marry you．Please let us be friends，as we were．”'
　　'I don't believe it，'said Jo．
　　'It's true．Then I'll walk out of the room with my head high．'Meg got up and pretended to do it-but ran back to her seat when she heard someone knock on the door．
　　Jo opened it with an angry look．
　　'Good afternoon，'said Mr Brooke．'I came to get my umbrella，which I left behind yesterday．'
　　'I'll get it，'said Jo，pushing past him．'Now Meg can tell him，'she thought．
　　But Meg was moving to the door．'I expect Mother will want to see you，'she said．'I'll call her．'
　　'Don't go，'he said．'Are you afraid of me，Meg？''How can I be afraid when you've been so kind to Father，said Meg．'I wish I could thank you for it．''You can，'he said． And he took Meg's small hand in his and looked at her lovingly．
　　'Oh，please don't，'she said，looking frightened．
　　'I only want to know if you love me a little，Meg，'he said gently．'I love you so much．'
　　This was the moment to repeat the words she had told Jo，but Meg forgot them all．'I don't know，'she said，so softly that John had to move closer to hear her reply．
　　He smiled gratefully．'Will you try to find out？'
　　'I'm too young，'she said， hesitating but feeling her heart beating rather fast．
　　'I'll wait while you learn to like me，'he said．'Will it be very difficult？'
　　'Not if I choose to learn，'she said．
　　'Please choose，Meg．I love to teach，and this is easier than German，'said John， taking her other hand．
　　She looked at him and saw that he was smiling．He seemed so sure of success that Meg became a little annoyed．She felt excited and strange，and taking her hands away from his， she said，' I don't choose．Please go away！'
　　Poor Mr Brooke looked shocked．'Do you mean that？'
　　'Yes，'she said，rather enjoying the game she was playing．'I don't want to think about these things． It's to soon．''I'll wait until you've had more time，'he said，and looked so unhappy that Meg began to feel sorry for him．
　　It was at this moment that Aunt March came in．She hadcome to see Mr March and was hoping to surprise the family．She did surprise two of them．Meg，with her face bright red，just stared at her aunt，while Mr Brooke hurried into another room．
　　'Goodness me， what's all this？'cried Aunt March．'It's Father's friend，said Meg hurriedly．'I'm so surprised to see you，Aunt March．'
　　'I can see that，'said Aunt March，sitting down．'What has he said to make your face turn pink？'
　　'Mr Brooke and I were just…talking，'said Meg．
　　'Brooke？The boy's tutor？I understand now．I know all about it because I made Jo tell me．You haven't promised to marry him，have you，Meg？If you have，you won't get one bit of my money，do you hear？'
　　It was exactly the wrong thing to say．When Meg was ordered not to marry John Brooke，she immediately decided that She would．'I'll marry whoever I want to，Aunt March，and you can give your money to anyone you like！'she said．'You'll be sorry！'said Aunt March．'Why don't you mar-ry a rich man to help your family？'
　　'Father and Mother like John，although he's poor，'said Meg．
　　'Be sensible，Meg，'said her aunt．'He knows I have money，and that's why he likes you，I suspect．'
　　'Don't say that！'said Meg．'My John wouldn't marry for money any more than I would！We'll work and wait，and I'll132be happy with him because he loves me，and Meg stopped as she remembered that she had told'her John'to go away．
　　Aunt March was very angry．'Just don't expect anything from me when you are married！'she said．And she went out of the room，banging the door behind her．
　　Meg didn't know whether to laugh or cry． Before she could decide，Mr Brooke came back in from the next room and puthis arms around her．'Oh Meg，I could hear your voices，'he said．'Thank you for proving that you do love me a little．''I didn't know how much until she said those things about you，'said Meg．
　　'So I can stay， and be happy？' he said．
　　'Yes，John，'she whispered，and hid her face on John's chest．
　　Jo returned and found them like that．Meg jumped and turned round，but John Brooke laughed and kissed the shocked Jo，saying，'Sister Jo．Wish us luck！'
　　Jo ran upstairs to find her parents．'Go down quickly！'she said．'John Brooke is behaving terribly and Meg likes it！'Mr and Mrs March left the room in a hurry，while Jo threw herself on the bed and told the awful news to Beth and Amy．But the little girls thought it was all most interesting and delightful．
　　Nobody knew what was said that afternoon，but a lot of talking was done． The quiet Mr Brooke managed to persuadehis friends that his plans were good and sensible，then he proudly took Meg in to supper．Everyone looked so happy that Jo tried to look pleased too．
　　After supper， Laurie arrived with some flowers for'Mrs John Brooke'，then he followed Jo into the corner of the room while the others went to welcome old Mr Laurence．
　　'What's the matter，Jo？' said Laurie．'You don't look very happy．'
　　'Nothing will ever be the same again，'said Jo sadly．'I've lost my dearest friend．'
　　'You've got me，'said Laurie．'I'm not good for much，but I promise I'll always be your friend，Jo．'
　　'I know you will，'answered Jo，gratefully．
　　'Then don't be sad，'he said．'I'll be back from college in three years time， and then we'll go abroad，or on a nice trip somewhere．Wouldn't that cheer you up？'
　　'Anything can happen in three years，'said Jo．
　　'That's true，'said Laurie．'Don't you wish you knew what was going to happen？'
　　'I don't think so，'said Jo．'It may be something sad，and everyone looks so happy now．'As she spoke，she looked round the room，and her face brightened at the sight．
　　Father and Mother sat happily together．Amy was drawing a picture of Meg and John， who were looking lovingly at each other．Beth lay on the floor，talking to her old friend，Mr Laurence．Jo sat in her favourite chair with a serious，quietlook on her face . Laurie smiled at her in the long mirror that was opposite them both . And Jo smiled back.




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Black Beauty by Anna Sewell





■ 1 My first home
　　The first place I can remember well was a pleasant field with a pond of clear water in it．Trees made shadows over the pond，and water plants grew at the deep end．On one side was another field，and on the other side we looked over a gate at our master's house， which stood by the roadside．At the top of our field were more tall trees，and at the bottom was a fast-running stream．
　　While I was young，I lived on my mother's milk，but as soon as I was old enough to eat grass，my mother went out to work during the day and came back in the evening．
　　There were six other young horses in me field，although they were older than I was．We all galloped together round the field， and had great fun．But sometimes the others would kick and bite．
　　'They are young farm horses and haven't learned how to behave，'my mother told me．'You are different．Your father is well known， and your grandfather twice won the most important race at Newmarket．Your grandmother was quiet and gentle，and you have never seen me kick or bite，have you？ I hope you will grow up to be gentle and a willing worker， and never bite or kick．'
　　I have never forgotten my mother's advice．She was a clever and sensible old horse．Her name was Duchess，but our master often called her Pet．He was a good，kind man，and my mother loved him very much．Whenever she saw him at the gate，she trotted across．He used to pat her and say，'Well，old Pet，and how is your little Darkie？'I was a dull black colour，so he called me Darkie．He sometimes brought a piece of bread for me，or a carrot for my mother，and I think we were his favourites．
　　When I was two years old，something happened which I have never forgotten．It was early spring，and there was a light mist over the trees and fields．I and the other young horses were feeding at the lower end of the field when we heard the distant cry of dogs．
　　The oldest among us lifted his head to listen．'There are the hounds！'he said，and immediately raced off．The rest of us followed him to the top of the field，where we could see several fields beyond．
　　My mother and another old horse were standing near．'They've found a hare，'said my mother，'and if they come this way，we shall see the hunt．'
　　Soon the dogs were all racing down the field next to ours，making a loud'yo-yo-yo-yo！'sound at the top of their voices．After them came men on horses，some in green coats，and all galloping as fast as they could．Suddenly，the dogs be-came silent and ran around with their noses to the ground．
　　'They've lost the smell of the hare，'said the old horse．'Perhaps it will escape．'
　　But the dogs began their'yo-yo-yo-yo！'again and came at full speed towards our field．Just then a hare，wild with fear，ran towards the trees．The dogs jumped over the stream and ran across the field，followed by the huntsmen． Six or eight jumped their horses over the stream，close behind the dogs．Be-fore the hare could get away，the dogs were upon her with wild cries．
　　We heard a terrible scream，and that was the end of the hare．One of the men picked her up and held her by the leg．She was covered in blood， but all the huntsmen seemed pleased．
　　I was so greatly surprised that at first I did not see what was happening by the stream， but when I did look， I saw a sad sight．Two fine horses were down，one in the stream and the other on the grass． One rider， who seemed unhurt，was climb-ing out of the water，but the other lay quite still．
　　'His neck is broken，'said my mother．'I can't understand why men are so fond of this sport．They quite often hurt them-selves and ruin good horses，all for one hare that they could get more easily some other way． But we are only horses， and don't know why men do these things．'
　　They carried the dead rider to our master's house， and I heard afterwards that it was George Gordon， the only son of a local landowner， and a fine young man．
　　A man from the village came to look at the black horse on the grass．The animal was in great pain and one of his legs was broken．The man began to feel the horse all over，then he shook his head．Someone ran to our master's house and came back with a gun．Soon after， there was a loud bang and a terrible cry，then all was still．The black horse did not move again．
　　My mother was very unhappy．'I've known that horse for years，'she said．'His name was Rob Roy．He was a good brave horse．'She never went near that end of the field again．
　　Not many days after，we heard the church bell and saw a long，strange black carriage，pulled by black horses．they were taking the body of young George Gordon to the churchyard to bury him．He would never ride again．I never knew what they did with Rob Roy，but it was all for one little hare．






■ 2 Birtwick Park
　　I was beginning to grow handsome．My coat was fine and soft， and was a shiny black． I had one white foot，and a pretty white star on my forehead． When I was four years old，Mr Gordon came to look at me．He looked closely at my eyes，my mouth， and my legs， and then I had to walk and trot and gallop for him．
　　'When he has been trained，'Mr Gordon said to my master，'he will do very well．'
　　My master liked to train his horses himself before selling them，and the next day my training began．
　　To train a horse is to teach him to wear a saddle，and to carry a man，woman or child on his back．The horse must also learn to wear a collar， and to stand still when it is put on；then to have a carriage fixed behind him， and to go fast or slow，whichever his driver wishes． He must never bite or kick or talk to other horses， and must always do what his master tells him，however tired or hungry he feels．
　　Like all horses that have grown up，I had to wear a bit and bridle．A bit is a great piece of cold hard metal， as thick as a man's finger，which is pushed into a horse's mouth between his teeth and over his tongue， with the ends coming out at the corners． It is held there by straps which go over the horse's head，under his neck，round his nose and under his chin．Reins，which the rider holds，are fastened to each end of the bit．Slowly， with my master's kind words and gentle ways， I learned to wear my bit and bridle．
　　Next there was the saddle．My master put it on my back very gently， then fixed the straps under my body， speaking qui-etly to me all the time．Then one morning， he got on my back and rode me round the field on the soft grass．He did this every day until I was used to it． Then he took me to the village where a man fixed metal shoes on to each hoof．My feet felt heavy and strange，but I got used to this，too．
　　There were more new things to wear．First，a heavy collar on my neck，and a bridle with great side pieces against my eyes，called blinkers．With these on，I could only see in front of me．But in time I got used to everything，and could do my work as well as my mother．
　　For a fortnight， my master sent me to a neighbour's farm for another kind of training， which was very useful to me．One field was next to the railway and had sheep and cows in it， and I was put in among them．I shall never forget the first train that thundered by， and how I galloped to the far side of the field，trembling with fear at this terrible noise．But after a few days I cared as little as the sheep and cows when a train passed by．
　　It was early in May when a man came to take me away to Mr Gordon's house．My master said，'Goodbye，Darkie．Be a good horse，and always do your best．'I put my nose into his hand and he patted me kindly，and then I left my first home．
　　* * *
　　Mr Gordon's house，which was called the Hall，stood in Birtwick Park，near the village．We went into the Park through a large gate，then trotted along a smooth road between some trees to the house and gardens．Beyond this were the stables．
　　There was room for many horses and carriages．My stable had four good stalls and a large window．It was very pleasant．The first stall was called a loose box，where a horse is not tied up all the time but is free to move around as he likes．It is a great thing to have a loose box．The groom put me into it and gave me some oats．Then he patted me，spoke kindly，and went away．In the stall next to mine stood a little fat grey pony．
　　'Hello，'I said．'What is your name？'
　　'Merrylegs，'he said，turning round．'I'm very handsome．I carry the young ladies on my back， and sometimes I take Mrs Gordon out in one of the carriages．Are you going to live next to me in the box？'
　　'Yes，'I said．
　　'Then I hope you are well-behaved，'he said．'I don't like anyone who bites．'
　　A horse's head looked over from the stall beyond．It was a tall brown mare， and she did not look pleased．'So it's you who has turned me out of my bx，'she said．
　　'I'm sorry，'I said，'but the man put me in here，so it is not my fault．I don't want to argue with anyone；I just wish to live in peace．
　　Later，Merrylegs told me about the tall brown mare．
　　'Ginger has a bad habit of biting people，'he explained．'One day，she bit James in the arm，and Miss Flora and Miss Jessie， the children， were afraid to come into the stable after that．If you don't bite， I hope they'll start to come again．'
　　I told him I never bit anything except grass and could not understand why Ginger bit people．
　　'No one was ever kind to her before she came here，'said Merrylegs．'John and James do all they can to please her，and our master is never unkind．I'm twelve years old， and I know that there isn't a better place for a horse all round the country than this．John has been here fourteen years and is the best groom there ever was．And you never saw a kinder stableboy than James．There was no reason for Ginger to bite anyone．It's her own fault that she did not stay in the box．'
　　The name of the groom was John Manly．The next morning， he got out his brushes and gave me a good grooming，then put a saddle on me．He rode me slowly at first，then at a trot， then at a gallop．As we came back through the Park， we met Mr and Mrs Gordon．They stopped and John jumped off．
　　'Well，John， how does he go？'said Mr Gordon．
　　'He's a fine horse，sir，'said John．'He's fast，but the light-est touch of the rein will guide him．They were shooting birds near Highwood，and a gun went off closeby． He pulled up a lit-tle，but I just held the rein and he wasn't frightened at all． It's my opinion he was never frightened or beaten when he was young．'
　　'Good，'said Mr Gordon．'I'll ride him tomorrow．'
　　I remembered my mother's advice， and the next day I tried to do exactly what my master wanted me to do．He was a very good rider，and when he came home his wife was waiting for him at the door．
　　'How do you like him， my dear？'she asked．
　　'I have never ridden a more pleasant horse，'answered Mr Gordon．'What shall we call him？'
　　'What about Blackbird，like your uncle's old horse？'said his wife．
　　'He's far handsomer than Blackbird，'said Mr Gordon．
　　'Yes，'she said，'he's quite a beauty， and he has a kind， in-telligent face．Shall we call him Black Beauty？'
　　'Black Beauty—why，yes，I think that's a very good name，'said Mr Gordon．
　　John went into the stable and told James．
　　'I'd call him Rob Roy，'said James，'if it did not remind ev-eryone of the past．I never saw two horses more alike．'
　　'That's not surprising，'said John．'Didn't you know that Farmer Grey's old Duchess was the mother of them both？'
　　So poor Rob Roy who was killed at the hunt was my brother！ Now I understood why my mother was so unhappy when he died．
　　John was very proud of me，and seemed to know just how a horse feels．And James was kind，too．
　　A day or two later，I went out in the carriage with Ginger．I wondered how we would get on together， but I found it easy to trot along beside her．
　　Merrylegs was a happy little pony and was everyone's favourite．We were soon great friends and I became quite happy in my new home．



　　* * *



■ 3 Ginger's story
　　What more could I want？ Freedom！For the first four years of my life I had a large field where I could gallop around at full speed—with no straps，no bit，and no blinkers．Now I stood in a stable，night and day，except when I was wanted for work， and sometimes when John took me out，I felt so strong，so full of life，that I wanted to jump or dance．
　　'Calm down，boy！'he would say．
　　Then，as soon as we were out of the village，he would let me trot fast for a few miles．Some grooms punished a horse for getting too excited，but not John．He knew how to control me with only the sound of his voice， and I was very fond of him．
　　Sometimes we did have our freedom in the field for an hour or two．This was on fine Sundays in the summer，because the carriage never went out on Sundays．It was wonderful．The grass was cool and soft to our feet，and the air was so sweet．And we could gallop or lie down or roll over on our backs，or do what we liked．
　　One day Ginger asked me about my old home and my train-ing．When I finished telling her，she said，'Life has been differ-ent for me．I was taken from my mother when I was young，and there was no kind master like yours to look after me．I had a bad time when I was trained．Several men caught me in a corner of the field and one held my nose so hard that I could only just breathe．Then another pulled my mouth open to put the bit in， and I was pulled along and beaten from behind．They didn't give me a chance to understand what they wan-ted．
　　'The old master， Mr Ryder， knew about horses， but he gave up most of the business to his son， who was tall and strong， but not gentle． They called him Samson， and he said that no horse could throw him out of the saddle．One day，he made me run round the field on a long rein until I was very tired and miser-able．The next morning he did the same again，then he put a saddle and bridle on me，and a new kind of bit into my mouth．
　　'The new bit was very painful and I pulled away and stood up on my back legs， which made him very angry． He stayed in the saddle and beat me with a whip，but after a long and terri-ble battle I threw him off and galloped to the other end of the field．
　　'I watched him go into the stable， but no one came to fetch me．Time went on and the sun was very hot．I was hungry and very thirsty．At last，just as the sun was going down， the old master came out with some oats．He spoke kindly and held out the oats for me to eat，then patted me gently and looked at the blood on my sides where Samson had whipped me．
　　'“Poor girl！”he said，then led me to the stable．Samson was there．“Keep out of the way，”said the master．“You've done a bad day's work for this horse with your bad temper． A bad-tempered man will never make a good-tempered horse．”He led me into my box and took off my saddle and bridle．Then he called for some warm water and gently cleaned the blood from my sides．
　　'After that，he often came to see me， but a man called Joe went on training me．He was quiet and thoughtful and I soon learned what he wanted．
　　'After my training，'Ginger went on，'I was bought by a dealer to match another horse of my colour．But then we were sold to a man in London who drove us with a bearing rein—a rein to hold our heads up unnaturally high and to keep them there，for hours and hours，until the pain was terrible．We had to wear two bits instead of one，and mine was so sharp that it made my mouth bleed．Sometimes we waited for hours while our master or mistress was at parties or the theatre， and if we weren't patient，the driver would whip us．'
　　'Didn't your master care about you at all？'I said．
　　'Only about how we looked，'replied Ginger．'He knew very little about horses．The driver told him I had a bad temper but would soon get used to the bearing rein．I was willing to work and learn，but they were so cruel that it made me angry．Then I broke away from the carriage one day，and that was the end of that place．
　　'I was sold to another man，but he had a groom as bad-tem-pered as Samson．He hit me across the legs with his stable brush if I didn't move quickly．I hated him， and one day when he made me angry，I bit him！He never came into my stall af-ter that， and I was soon sold again．
　　'A dealer heard of me and said he thought he knew one place where I should do well．“It's wrong for a fine horse to go bad like that，”he said．And I was brought here，not long before you came．Of course，it's very different here．But who knows how long it will last？ I've decided that all men are my natural enemies．'
　　I was sorry for Ginger， but as the weeks went on， she be-came happier and more gentle．
　　'I do believe Ginger is getting quite fond of me，'James said one day．
　　'She'll be as good as Black Eeauty one day，'replied John．'Kindness is all she needs，poor thing！'






■ 4 Kindness and cruelty
　　Aneighbour of the Gordons'，Mr Blomefield，had a large family of boys and girls who often came to play with Miss Jessie and Miss Flora．One of the girls was the same age as Miss Jessie，two of the boys were older，and there were sev-eral little ones．Whenever they came， the children loved to ride Merrylegs．
　　One afternoon when they were visiting，James brought Merrylegs in and said，'Now，behave yourself．'
　　'What did you do，Merrylegs？'I asked him．
　　'Those young people didn't seem to know whell I was tired，'he said，'so I just threw them off backwards．It was the only thing they could understand．'
　　'You threw the children off！'I sald．'Oh，no！Did you throw Miss Flora or Miss Jessie？'
　　'No，of course not！ I'm quiet and careful with them， and with the little ones．I'm the best friend and riding teacher those children have．It's not them，it's the boys，'he said．'The other children rode me for nearly two hours， then the boys rode me，one after the other，for an hour，hitting me with a stick．I didn't get annoyed but I did get tired， so I stopped once or twice to let them know．But boys think a horse is like a machine and can go on as long and as fast as they want it to．They never think that we get tired．As one was whipping me，I stood up on my back legs and he fell off．He got on again and I did the same．Then the other boy tried and I put him down on the grass．They're not bad boys，and don't mean to be cruel， but they have to learn．
　　'When they told James，he was angry to see those big sticks and told the boys not to use them again．'
　　'I would give those boys a good kick，'said Ginger．
　　'I know you would，'said Merrylegs．'But they expect me to look after those children， and they expect me to be good-tempered，and I will be．You never had a place where they were kind to you，Ginger，and I'm sorry for you． But good places make good horses，and I wouldn't make our people angry for anything！If I started kicking people，they would very quickly sell me，perhaps to someone cruel． I hope that never happens．'
　　* * *
　　I often wondered why Sir Oliver，the oldest horse in the stable，had so short a tall—only about twenty centimetres long—and one day I asked him，'Did you have an accident？'
　　'It was no accident！'he said，angrily．'My long and beautiful tail was cut off when I was a young horse． At that time，some owners thought it was fashionable！'
　　'How terrible！'I said．
　　'Yes，terrible and cruel，'said Sir Oliver．'Now I can never brush the flies off my sides or back legs， and all because of fashion．Some owners cut off the tails of their dogs to make them look brave，or cut their pretty little ears to make them look fashionable．They don't cut off the ends of their children's ears， do they？Why do they think it's all right to do these things to their animals？'
　　Mr Gordon was never cruel， and he would not stand by and watch others be cruel to animals．We were riding home one morning when we saw a big man driving towards us in a small carriage，pulled by a beautiful little pony．As he got to the Park gates，the pony turned towards them．Without warning，the man pulled the pony's head round so roughly that the little animal almost fell over．Then he began to whip the pony，angrily．The animal tried to move forward，but the man held it back and continued to whip it．
　　'Sawyer！'shouted my master．
　　The man looked up．He was a builder who often came to the Park to do work．'He's too fond of going his own way！' he told my master．'He's not supposed to turn in through your gates；the road is straight on．'
　　'You often drive that pony to my house，'said my master．'It only shows that the horse is intelligent and remembers these things．How could he know you weren't going there to-day？ I've never seen a horse beaten so cruelly or with so much anger．What will people think of you，Sawyer？As well as hurting the horse，you hurt your own good name—do you want people to think of you as a cruel，bad-tempered man？'
　　We went home slowly，and I could tell by his voice that the master was unhappy at what we had seen．



　　* * *



■ 5 The storm
　　One day in the autumn my master had to go to a distant town on business． John harnessed me to the carriage and the three of us went off． There had been a lot of rain， and the wind was very strong．When we came to the river，the wa-ter was so high it nearly reached the wooden bridge，and many of the fields were under water． In one low part of the road the water was half-way up to my knees．
　　We got to the town and the master's business took a long time．It was late in the afternoon when we started back for home．The wind was much stronger，and as we drove through a wood，I heard my master say，'I've never been out in a storm as bad as this，John．'Indeed，I thought so too， hearing the ter-rible noise of that wild wind in the trees．
　　'I wish we were out of this wood，'said my master．
　　'Yes，sir，'agreed John．'We don't want one of those bran-ches coming down on top of us．'
　　But just as he finished speaking，there was a great noise of wood breaking， and a big tree came crashing down through the other smaller trees and fell across the road right in front of us！I was very frightened and I stopped immediately， but I didn't turn round or try to run away．John jumped out and quickly ran to my side．
　　'What can we do now，John？'said my master．
　　'We can't drive over the tree or get round it，sir，'said John．'We'll have to go back to the crossroads，and take the longer road round to the wooden bridge．It will make us late，but the horse isn't tired．'
　　It was nearly dark when we got to the wooden bridge．We could see water over the middle of it，but this often happened when the river was high．But the moment my feet touched the first part of the bridge，I was sure something was wrong，and I stopped suddenly．
　　'Go on，Beauty，'said my master，and he touched me with the whip．I did not move， so he hit me sharply， but I would not go forward．
　　'There's something wrong，'said John，and he jumped from the carriage and began to look round．He tried to lead me for-ward．'Come on，Beauty，what's the matter？'
　　Of course I could not tell him， but I knew the bridge was not safe．
　　Just then a man ran out of the house on the other side of the bridge．'Stop！Stop！'he cried．
　　'What's the matter？'shouted my master．
　　'The bridge is broken in the middle，'said the man，'and part of it was carried away．If you come across， you'll fall in the river！'
　　'Thank you，Beauty！'John said to me， and turned me gently round to the right-hand road by the riverside．
　　It got darker and the wind got quieter as I trotted towards home by another，much longer road．The two men were quiet for some time， but then my master spoke．
　　'We were very close to drowning in that river，John，'he said．'Men may be clever enough to think of things for them-selves，but animals know things without thinking，and that's often saved a man's life，as it has ours tonight．People don't realize how wonderful their animals are，nor do they make friends with them as they should．'
　　When we arrived back at Birtwick Park，the mistress ran out to meet us．'I've been so worried！'she said．'Are you all right？ Did you have an accident？'
　　'We nearly did，'said my master．'But Black Beauty was cleverer than we were，and saved us all from drowning！'
　　* * *
　　One morning early in December，the master came to the stable with a letter in his hand，looking very serious．
　　'Good morning，John，'he said．'Tell me，does James work hard and do what you tell him to do？'
　　'Yes，sir， always，'replied John．
　　'And he doesn't stop work when your back is turned？'
　　'Never，sir．'
　　'And if he goes out with the horses，does he stop to talk to friends，or go into houses where he has no business， leaving the horses outside？'said the master．
　　'No，sir，'said John．'And if anybody has said that about James， I don't believe it．I never had a pleasanter， more honest young man in this stable．'
　　The master smiled and looked across at James，who was standing by the door．'James， I'm glad John's opinion of you agrees with my own，'he said．'I've had a letter from my wife's brother，Sir Clifford Williams． He wants me to find him an honest young groom who knows what he's doing．The man who drives his carriage is getting old and needs a young man who will work with him and be able to do his job one day．How old are you？'
　　'Nineteen next May，sir，'said James．
　　'That's young． What do you think，John？'
　　'It is young， sir，'said John，'but he's tall and strong． He doesn't have much experience of driving，but he has a light touch and a quick eye．'
　　'Well，James，'said the master，'talk to your mother at din-ner-time and let me know what you want to do．'
　　A few days later it was agreed that James would go to Clif-ford Hall in a month or six weeks，and for the next few weeks he drove the carriage．We went in and out of town，through busy streets， and to the railway station， where the road was narrow and there were lots of other carriages hurrying to and from the station．
　　Then my master and mistress decided to visit some friends who lived about seventy-five kilometres from our home．'You can drive us，James，'said my master．



　　* * *



■ 6 The fire
　　The first day we travelled about fifty kilometres， but James drove carefully and made sure that Ginger and I were always on the smoothest part of the road． It was evening when we reached the hotel where we were going to stay that night．It was in the Market Place and two stablemen came out to us．
　　The chief stableman was a pleasant old man， and he led me into a long stable with six or eight stalls in it，and two or three horses．The younger man brought in Ginger，and James watched while we were groomed．
　　'I thought I was quick，'James told the old stableman，'but you're quicker than anyone．'
　　'I've worked with horses since I was twelve years old， and I can tell you it's good to be able to work with a well-behaved，well-cared for animal like this，'said the stableman，patting my neck．'Who is your master？'
　　'Mr Gordon of Birtwick Park，'said James．
　　'I've heard of him，'said the stableman．'He's a good judge of horses， and the best rider in this part of the country．'
　　'He doesn't ride very often now，'said James，'not since the poor young master was killed．'
　　'I read about that in the newspaper，'said the stableman．'A fine horse was killed too，wasn't it？'
　　'Yes，an excellent horse，'said James．'He was the brother of this one，and just like him．'
　　'Terrible！'said the old man．'It was a bad place to jump，wasn't it？ A man's life and a horse's life are worth more than a hare—or they should be！'
　　Later that evening，the younger stableman brought in anoth-er horse， and a young man with a pipe in his mouth came into the stable to talk to him．
　　'Towler， go up and get some hay and put it down for this horse， will you？'said the stableman．'But put down your pipe first．'
　　'All right，'said the other man，and went up a ladder and through a little door． I heard him step across the floor over my head and push down some hay through a hole in the roof，into the new horse's feeding place．
　　James came in to look at us before he went to bed，and then the door was locked．
　　I don't know how long I slept， or what time it was when I woke up，but the air seemed thick and I heard Ginger and an-other horse moving about worriedly．It was quite dark and I could see nothing．The stable was full of smoke，and it was al-most impossible to breathe．
　　The smoke seemed to come from the little door above me，and I could hear a strange noise up there． The other horses were now all awake， moving about restlessly．
　　At last I heard someone outside， and then the younger sta-bleman ran in with a light．He began to untie the horses，and tried to lead then out． The first horse would not go with him，nor the second or third． He tried to pull me out， but he was so frightened himself that he frightened me，and I would not move．
　　The noise above was louder now and there was a shout of 'Fire！'outside． The old stableman came in quietly and quickly and got one horse out，then another． By now the flames were coming down through the roof and the noise was terrible．
　　Then I heard James's voice， quiet and friendly as it always was．'Come on，Beauty，'he said，'we'll soon get you out of this smoke．'He took off his scarf and tied it over my eyes，then led me out， patting me all the time．He took the scarf off，then shouted，'Take this horse， somebody， while I go back for the other！'
　　Windows in the hotel were open and people were shouting．I watched the stable door，where the smoke came out thicker than ever．Then I heard one voice above all the others，and recognized it as my master's．
　　'James Howard！James Howard！ Are you there？'
　　There was no answer，only the crash of something falling in the stables—but the next moment I saw James coming through the smoke，leading Ginger with him．
　　'My brave boy！'said the master．'Are you hurt？'
　　James shook his head，unable to speak because of the smoke．
　　Suddenly，I heard the sound of wheels and galloping horses．'It's the fire－engine！'shouted someone．
　　Two horses ran past me，pulling the heavy fire－engine．The firemen jumped out，and we went quickly into the wide，quiet Market Place，out of their way．
　　The master led us to a large hotel on the other side where a stableman came to take us in；then the master hurried off to find his wife．
　　The next morning，he came to see how we were and to speak to James．I did not hear much，but James looked very happy and the master looked proud of him．
　　How did the fire start？Someone said they saw Dick Towler go into the stable smoking a pipe，but that when Dick came out he didn't have it．The young stableman said that he asked Dick to go up the ladder to put down some hay，but also told him to put down his pipe first．Dick said that he did this，but nobody believed him．
　　James said the roof and floor had all fallen in and only the black walls were standing；the two poor horses who could not get out were buried under the fallen roof．






■ 7 Joe Green
　　The rest of our journey was very easy，and the next evening we reached the house of our master's friend，where a groom took us to a comfortable stable．We stayed two or three days，then returned home．John was glad to see us，and we were glad to see him．
　　'I wonder who will come in my place，'said James．
　　'Little Joe Green，'said John．'He's only fourteen and a half but he has a kind heart and wants to come，so I've agreed to try him for six weeks．'
　　The next day，Joe Green came to learn all he could before James left．He was a nice happy boy and always came to work singing．But then the day came when James had to leave us．
　　'I'm leaving a lot behind，'he said sadly to John．'My mother，and you，a good master and mistress，and the horses．And I shan't know anybody at the new place．'
　　'It's hard to leave your home for the first time，'said John，'but if you get on well—which I'm sure you will——your moth－er will be proud of you．'
　　Everyone was sorry to lose James，but Joe tried hard to learn，and John was pleased with him．
　　* * *
　　One night I woke up to hear the stable bell ringing loudly．I heard the door open at John's house，and his feet running up to the Hall．He was back quickly．
　　'Wake up，Beauty！'he said，coming into the stable．'We must go quickly now！'And before I could think，he had the saddle on my back and the bridle on my head．
　　The master was waiting at the Hall door with a letter in his hand．'Ride for your life，John！'he said．'Give this to Dr White，then rest your horse and be back as soon as you can．Mrs Gordon is very ill．'
　　Away went John and I，through the Park，through the vil－lage，and down the hill．There was a long piece of flat road by the riverside，and John said，'Now Beauty，do your best！'I needed no whip，and for two miles I galloped as fast as I could——perhaps even faster than my grandfather，who won the race at Newrmarket．When we came to the bridge，John slowed me down a little and patted my neck．'Well done，Beauty！'he said．
　　Then I was off again，as fast as before．The air was cold and the moon was bright，and it was a pleasant night．We went through a village，then a dark wood，then uphill，then down－hill，and after twelve kilometres，we came to the town．
　　It was three o'clock when we stopped by Dr White's door．John rang the bell，then knocked on the door like thunder．A window was pushed up and Dr White's head appeared．'What do you want？'he said．
　　'Mrs Gordon is very ill，'said John．'You must come at once，or she'll die．Here's a letter．'
　　The doctor was soon at the door．'My horse has been out all day and is exhausted．Can I take yours？'
　　'My master told me to rest him，'said John，'but take him if you think it's best，sir．'
　　'I'll soon be ready，'said the doctor．
　　John stood by me and patted my neck．I was very hot．Then the doctor came out with his riding whip．
　　'You won't need that，sir，'said John．'Black Beauty will go until he drops．'
　　The doctor was a heavier man than John，and not so good a rider，but I did my very best．Joe was waiting at the gate and the master was at the Hall door．He did not say a word．The doctor went into the house with him，and Joe led me to the stable．
　　My legs were shaking and there was not a dry hair on my body．The water ran down my legs and I was hot all over．Poor Joe！He was young and knew very little．He did the best he could，cleaning my legs and my chest，but he did not put a warm cloth on me；he thought I was so hot that I would not like it．He gave me some cold water to drink，then he gave me some food and went away．
　　Soon I began to shake and tremble with cold，and I ached all over．I wished John was there，but he had twelve kilometres to walk，so I tried to sleep．
　　After a long time，I heard John at the door．I gave a low cry，and he was at my side in a moment．I could not tell him how I felt，but he seemed to know immediately．He covered me with three warm cloths，then ran for some hot water and made me a warm drink．
　　John seemed very angry．'Stupid boy！'he said to himself，over and over again．'No cloth put on，and I suppose the water was cold too．Boys are no good！'
　　I became very ill，and could not breathe without pain．John looked after me day and night，and my master often came to see me too．
　　'My poor Beauty，'he said one day．'My good horse，you saved your mistress's life．Yes，you saved her life．'
　　I was very glad to hear that．John told my master that he never saw a horse go so fast．
　　One night，Tom Green，Joe's father，came to help John give me my medicine，then stayed for a while．At first both men were silent，then Tom said，'John，please say a kind word to Joe．The boy is heart－broken；he can't eat his meals，and he can't smile．He knows it's his fault Beauty is ill，but he did his best．He says if Beauty dies，no one will ever speak to him again．But he's not a bad boy．'
　　After a short pause，John said，'I know he meant no harm，but I'm proud of that horse，and I hate to think his life may be thrown away like this．But I'll give the boy a kind word to－morrow，if Beauty is better．'
　　I heard no more of this conversation，as the medicine did well and sent me to sleep，and in the morning I fell much bet－ter．
　　Joe learned quickly after this，and was so careful that John began to give him many things to do．One day，John was out and the master wanted a letter taken immediately to a gentle－man's house about five kilometres away．He told Joe to saddle me and take it．
　　The letter was delivered and we were returning through a field where we saw a cart full of bricks．They were so heavy that the wheels of the cart were half－buried in the soft ground，and the horses could not move the cart at all．The man leading the horses was shouting and whipping them without stopping．
　　'Don't whip the horses like that，'Joe shouted at him．'The wheels are half-buried and won't move．I'll help you take some bricks out to make the cart lighter．'
　　'Mind your own business！'said the man angrily．He was in a terrible temper and more than half－drunk．
　　Joe turned me，and we galloped towards the house of the brickmaker，Mr Clay．Joe knocked on the door．
　　The door opened．'Hallo，young man，'began Mr Clay．
　　'There's a man in your field whipping two horses to death！'Joe told him，his voice shaking with anger．'I told him to stop，but he wouldn't．I offered to help him lighten the cart，but he refused．I think he's drunk．Please go，sir！'
　　'I will！'said the man，and hurried off．
　　When we got home，Joe told John all about it．
　　'You did the right thing，'said John．'Many people would ride by and say it was none of their business．But cruelty is everybody's business．'
　　Just before dinner，the master sent for Joe．The drunken man was accused of cruelty to horses and Joe was wanted to tell his story to the police．
　　'I'll tell it gladly，'said Joe．
　　We heard afterwards that the poor horses were so exhausted and so badly beaten that the man might have to go to prison．
　　Joe came across and gave me a friendly pat．'We won't al－low cruelty，will we，old friend？'he said．
　　And he seemed to have grown up suddenly．



　　* * *



■ 8 Earlshall Park
　　I lived at Birtwick Park for three happy years，but then changes came．Our mistress was often ill and the doctor advised her to go and live in a warm country for two or three years．Everyone was very sorry，but the master immediately started making arrangements to leave England．
　　John did his work silently and sadly，and Joe didn't sing any more．Then we heard that the master had sold Ginger and me to an old friend of his，Lord Gray．Merrylegs was given to the neighbour，Mr Blomefield，and Joe was employed to look after him．John was offered several good jobs but he wanted to wait and look around．
　　'I want to train young horses，'he told the master．
　　'I cannot think of anyone more suitable for that work than you，John，'said the master．'If I can help you in any way，write to me．'
　　The next morning，John took Ginger and me to Earlshall Park where Lord Gray lived．There was a very fine house and lots of stables．John asked for Mr York，who was going to be our new driver．
　　Mr York was a good－looking man of about forty，with a voice that expected to be obeyed．He called a groom to take us to our boxes，then invited John to have a drink with him．We were taken to a pleasant stable and put in boxes next to one another，then we were groomed and fed．Half an hour later，John and Mr York came to see us．
　　Mr York looked at us carefully．'Is there anything you want to mention about them，Mr Manly？'he said．
　　'I don't believe there's a better pair of horses in the coun－try，'said John，'but they're not alike．The black one has the most perfect temper I've ever known．The other was badly treated before she came to us，but has grown better－tempered in the last three years．We've never used a bearing rein with either of them．'
　　'They'll wear one here，'said York．'Lady Gray follows the fashion，and if her horses are not reined up tight，she doesn't like it．'
　　'I'm sorry to hear that，'said John．He came to pat each of us for the last time．I held my face close to him，which was all I could do to say goodbye．And then he was gone，and I have never seen him since．
　　Lord Gray came to look at us the next day and seemed pleased．He heard what John had said about us．'Keep an eye on the mare，'he said to York．'Don't make the bearing rein too tight at first，and I'll mention it to my wife．'
　　In the afternoon，we were harnessed to the carriage and La－dy Gray came out and looked at us．She was a tall，proud-look-ing woman and did not look pleased，but she said nothing and got into the carriage．
　　The bearing rein annoyed me but did not pull my head any higher than I was used to carrying it．I was worried about Gin－ ger，but she seemed quite happy．
　　But the next afternoon when Lady Gray came down the steps，she said，'York，you must put those horses'heads higher；they don't look nice．'
　　'I'm sorry，my Lady，'said York，'but they have not been reined up for three years．But if it pleases you，I can take them up a little more．'
　　'Do that，'she said．
　　That day we had to pull the carriage up a steep hill．I want－ed to put my head forward to make the work easier，but I couldn't．
　　'Now you can see what it's like，'said Ginger，when we came back．'If it doesn't get any worse，I shall say nothing．But I won't have the rein pulled up tight！'
　　Each day the bearing reins were shortened a little more；then one day Lady Gray came out later than usual and said，'York，when will you get those horses'heads up？Pull them up at once，and let's have no arguing．'
　　York came to me first and made the rein very tight．Then he went to Ginger．But the moment he took off the rein in order to shorten it，she stood up on her back legs．York and the groom could not control her．She kicked herself out of the car－riage and fell down，kicking me on the leg as she went．York sat on her head to keep her still and shouted，'Let the black horse out！Undo the carriage！Cut the harness！ '
　　The groom cut me out of the harness and hurried me back to my box，then ran back to York．I was angry and my leg hurt，and I felt that I wanted to kick the first person who came near me．
　　Soon after，Ginger was led in by two grooms．York was with her and came to look at me．
　　'I knew those bearing reins would cause trouble，'he said to himself．He saw where I had been kicked and washed the place gently with hot water to help the pain．
　　Lord Gray was angry when he heard what had happened．He blamed York for taking orders from the mistress，and York said that he would take orders only from Lord Gray himself from now on．But things went on the same as before，except that Ginger was never put into the carriage again．I pulled it with a horse called Max who was used to the tight rein．But those four months pulling Lady Gray's carriage were terrible．The sharp bit cut into my tongue and mouth，the rein hurt my neck and made it difficult to breathe，and I felt tired and very miserable．
　　In the spring，Lord Gray and some of his family went up to London and took York with them．Two daughters remained at the Hall．Lady Harriet never went out in the carriage，and Lady Anne preferred riding on horseback with her brother or cousins．She chose me for her horse and I enjoyed these rides，sometimes with Ginger，sometimes with Lizzie，a horse liked by the young gentlemen．
　　There was a gentleman called Blantyre staying at the Hall，who always rode Lizzie and was so pleased with her that Lady Anne wanted to try her．
　　'I don't advise it，'said Blantyre．'She's too easily fright－ened for a lady to ride．'
　　'My dear cousin，'said Lady Anne，laughing，'I've been rid-ing horses since I was a baby and have followed the hounds many times．Now，help me up．'
　　So Blantyre helped her into the saddle，then climbed on me．Just as we were moving off，Lady Harriet asked for a message to be taken to Dr Ashley in the village．
　　The village was about two kilometres away，and the doctor's house was the last one in it．Blantyre got off to open the gate for Lady Anne but she said，'I'll wait here for you．'
　　He went off and we waited．
　　There was a field with an open gate on the opposite side of the road，and at that moment some young horses came trotting out．They were wild and excited，and there was a boy behind them，waving a large whip．Suddenly，one of the young horses ran across the road，and banged into Lizzie's back legs．She gave a violent kick，nearly unseating Lady Anne，and immedi－ately galloped away at full speed．
　　I gave a loud neigh for help and made a noise with my feet until Mr Blantyre came running out of the doctor's house．He saw Lizzie and Lady Anne，now far away down the road，and quickly jumped into the saddle，and we raced after them．
　　For about two kilometres the road was straight，then it turned to the right before becoming two roads．Long before we came to the bend，Lady Anne was out of sight．Which way had she gone？A woman was in her garden，looking up the road．'Which way？'shouted Blantyre．
　　'To the right！'cried the woman．
　　Away we went，up the right－hand road．We saw her for a moment，then she was gone again round another bend．Several times we saw her，but lost her again．Then we came to some rough land，very uneven and full of holes in the ground-the worst possible place for galloping．
　　On this open ground we could now see Lady Anne clearly，her long hair flying out behind her in the wind，and slowly we began to catch up．There was a wide ditch ahead and I was sure it would stop them，but without a pause Lizzie jumped it—and fell．
　　I cleared the ditch and landed safely．Lady Anne was lying on the ground，not moving．Blantyre jumped down beside her and called her name，but there was no reply．Her face was white and her eyes were closed．
　　'Annie，dear Annie，do speak！'he cried．
　　There were two men cutting grass close by and they saw Lizzie galloping away without a rider and came across．
　　'Can you ride？'Blantyre asked one of them．
　　'I'm not a good horseman，sir，'he said．'But I'll do my best．'
　　'Ride this horse to the doctor's and ask him to come imme－diately，then go on to the Hall，'said Blantyre．'Tell them all you know and ask them to send a carriage．'
　　The man climbed into my saddle and we galloped off．I tried not to shake him about too much，and he soon discovered that he needed no whip．
　　There was a lot of excitement at the Hall when they heard what happened．I was put into my box，the saddle and bridle were taken off and a cloth was thrown over me．
　　Two days later，Blantyre came and patted me．
　　'You did well，'he said．'I'm sure you knew Annie was in danger．She must ride only you from now on．'
　　From this I knew that my young mistress was out of danger and would soon be able to ride again．






■ 9 The accident and new masters
　　Aman called Reuben Smith looked after us while York was in London．He was gentle and clever with horses，and an excellent driver．But he had one fault——he sometimes drank too much．For weeks or months he was all right，but then without warning he would begin to drink heavily and be－have badly．But he was a useful man so York had kept quiet about Smith's drinking，saying nothing to Lord Gray．Then one night Smith drove some ladies and gentlemen home from a party and was so drunk that he could not hold the reins．York could not hide this and Lord Gray told Smith to leave．
　　However，some time later，York spoke again to Lord Gray，who was very kind－hearted，and he took，Reuben Smith back．Smith promised never to get drunk again and kept his promise，and because of this he was told to look after the stables while York was away．
　　One day the carriage needed some repairs so it was arranged that Smith would take it to town，leave it at the carriage-maker's，and then ride me back again．Mr Blantyre wanted to go to the station，so he went with us．
　　At the station，Mr Blantyre gave Smith some money and said，'Take care of Lady Anne，Reuben，and don't let anyone else except her ride Black Beauty．'
　　We left the carriage at the maker's，and Smith rode me to the White Lion hotel．He told the stableman to give me some food and have me ready for four o'clock．One of my front shoes was loose but the stableman did not see it until four o'clock．Smith came back at five and said he would now leave at six be－cause he'd met some old friends．The stableman told him about the loose shoe．
　　'It'll be all right until we get home，'said Smith．
　　He finally came back at nine o'clock，shouting loudly and in a very bad temper．We left and almost immediately he began to gallop，often giving me sharp cuts with the whip，although I was going at full speed．Before we were out of the town my shoe came off，but Smith was too drunk to notice．
　　It was very dark，and on the rough road at that speed，my foot was soon cut and bleeding from the sharp stones．I could not go on；the pain was too great，and I fell violently on both my knees．Smith was thrown off．He tried to get up but couldn't，then he lay still．
　　I could do nothing but wait．
　　It was nearly midnight when I heard a horse's feet and the wheels of a carriage．I neighed loudly，and was very happy to hear an answering neigh from Ginger，and men's voices．Then the carriage came out of the darkness and stopped．
　　Two men jumped down beside Smith．'It's Reuben，'said one，'and he's not moving，Robert．'
　　'He's dead，'said Robert，touching Smith．'His hands are cold and his head is covered with blood．'
　　They looked at me and saw my cut knees．
　　'The horse has been down and thrown him！'said Robert．He tried to lead me forward but I almost fell again．'He's bad in the foot，too．No wonder he went down，riding over these stones without a shoe！Reuben was drunk，Ned．He would nev－er ride a horse without a shoe unless he was drunk．'
　　Ned took Smith's body back in the carriage，and Robert tied his handkerchief round my foot and led me slowly home．No one blamed me for the accident．The owner of the White Lion hotel said that Reuben Smith was drunk when he left．
　　But I had to leave Earlshall，and so did Ginger．
　　For a month or two I was allowed to live out in a field，and one day Ginger was brought in to join me．She had been ruined by the hard riding of Lord Gray's son，and aher twelve months'rest she was going to be sold．And although my knees got better，they looked very ugly and so I was no longer suit-able for a fashionable family．It was very pleasant being in the field with Ginger，but one day Robert came in and took me away．We were both very sad to say goodbye to each other， Ginger and I．
　　I was sold to a man in Bath who kept many horses and dif-ferent kinds of carriages for hire．I was a'job horse'and all kinds of people hired me．Some were good drivers，others were very bad．Then one man persuaded my master to sell me to a friend of his who wanted a safe，pleasant horse for riding．
　　And so that summer I was sold to Mr Barry．
　　Mr Barry knew very little about horses but he hired a com-fortable stable for me，and a man called Filcher to look after me．He ordered the best oats，and plenty of other good food for me to eat，too．
　　For a while all went well，but then there seemed to be fewer oats and more grass in my meals．The grass food，though very good，was not enough to keep me strong and healthy．However，I could not say anything and it went on for about two months．
　　Then one afternoon my master rode into the country to see a friend——a gentleman farmer who knew about horses，and who looked very closely at me．
　　'Your horse doesn't look as well as he did when you first had him，Barry，'he said，feeling my neck and shoulders．'See how wet and warm he is——after just a gentle ride！'
　　'My groom says that horses are never in good condition in the autumn，'said my master．
　　'But this is only August！'said the farmer．'With your light work and the good food，he shouldn't be like this．I don't know who eats your oats，my friend，'he went on，'but I doubt that your horse gets any of them．I advise you to watch your groom more closely．'
　　Oh，how I wanted to speak！I wanted to tell my master where his oats went to．My groom came every morning at six o'clock，bringing his little by with him．The boy carried a basket and went into the room where the oats were kept．I would see them filling a bag with oats and putting the bag into the basket．
　　Five or six mornings after the visit to the farmer，the boy left the stable with his basket of oats，but came back soon after，looking frightened，with two policemen holding his arms．
　　'Show me where your father keeps the food for his chickens，'one policemen said to the boy．
　　The boy began to cry but there was no escape．Moments later，the policemen found another empty bag like the one in the boy's basket，and they took Filcher away with them．That was the last I ever saw of him．
　　Another groom was employed，but he was very lazy about cleaning and I became thin and unhealthy from standing in a wet，dirty stable．After all this trouble with grooms，Mr Barry decided to stop keeping a horse and I was sent to a horse fair —a place where hundreds of horses were bought and sold，and more lies were told，I think，than in any other place in the country．
　　That day I was lucky．I was bought for twenty－five pounds by a man called Jeremiah Barker，but everyone called him Jerry and I shall do the same．






■ 10 A London cab horse
　　Jerry Barker was a small man，but well－made and quick in all his movements．He lived in London and was a cab driver．Jerry's wife，Polly，was a little woman with smooth dark hair and dark eyes．His son，Harry，was nearly twelve years old， and was a tall，good－tempered boy．His daughter，Dolly，was eight，and she looked just like her mother．
　　Jerry had his own cab and two horses，which he drove and groomed himself．His other horse was a tall，white animal called Captain．The next morning，Polly and Dolly came to see me．Harry had helped his father since early that morning and had already decided that I would be a good horse．Polly brought me a piece of apple and Dolly brought me some bread．
　　'We'll call him Jack，after the old one，'said Jerry．'Shall we，Polly？'
　　'Yes，'she said．'I like to keep a good name going．'
　　Captain went out in the cab all morning and I went out in the afternoon．Jerry took a lot of care to make sure that my col－lar and bridle were comfortable——and there was no bearing rein！
　　We went to the cab stand where the other cabs were waiting for passengers，and took our place at the back of the last cab．Several of the other drivers came to look at me．
　　'Too handsome，'saia one．'You'll find something wrong with him one morning．'
　　Then a man in a grey coat and grey hat came up．His name was Grant，and he looked a happy，sensible kind of man．He had been longer on the cab stand than any of the other men，so they let him through to have a look at me，and waited for his opinion．
　　He looked me all over very carefully，then said：
　　'He's the right kind for you，Jerry．I don't care what you paid for him，he'll be worth it．'
　　My first week as a cab horse was very hard．I was not used to London—the noise，the hurry，the crowds of horses，carts and carriages．But Jerry was a good driver and soon discovered that I was willing to work and do my best．He never used the whip on me，and we soon understood each other as well as a horse and man can do．Jerry kept his horses clean and gave us plenty of food and fresh water，and on Sundays we rested．
　　I never knew a better man than my new master．He was kind and good-tempered，like John Manly．Harry was clever at stable work and always wanted to do what he could．Polly and Dolly came in the morning to brush out the cab，and to wash the glass，while Jerry gave Captain and me a grooming．There was a lot of laughing and fun between them，which all helped to keep Captain and me happy． The family came early in the morning because Jerry did not like lateness．It always made him angry when people wanted him to drive hard because of their own lateness．
　　One day，two wild-looking young men called to him．
　　'Cabby！Hurry up，we're late for our train at Victoria．Get us there in time for the one o'clock train and we'll pay you double！'
　　'I will take you at the usual speed，gentlemen，'said Jerry．
　　'Extra money doesn't pay for extra speed．'
　　Larry's cab was standing next to ours．He opened the door and said，'I'm your man，gentlemen！My horse will get you there all right．'And as he shut them in，with a smile at Jerry，he said，'He always refuses to go faster than a trot！'Then，whipping his horse hard，he went off as fast as he could．
　　Jerry patted me on the neck．'Extra money won't pay for that kind of thing，will it，Jack？'he said．
　　Although he was against hard driving to please careless peo－ple，he always went at a fair speed and was not against going faster if there was a good reason．
　　I remember one morning we were on the stand waiting for a passenger when a young man carrying a large suitcase went by．He stepped on a piece of apple which lay in the road，and fell down heavily．Jerry ran across the road and helped him up，then took him into a shop to sit him down．
　　Some time later，the young man，looking white and ill，came out again and called Jerry，so we went across the road．
　　'Can you take me to the South－Eastern Railway？'he said．'My fall has made me late，and it's very important that I don't miss the twelve o'clock train．I'll pay you extra if you can get me there in time．'
　　'We'll do our best，sir，'said Jerry，and helped him into the cab．
　　It was always difficult to drive fast in the city in the middle were used to it，and no one was faster at getting through the carriages and carts，all moving at different speeds，going this way and that way．In and out，in and out we went，as fast as a horse can do it．And we got to the station just as the big clock showed eight minutes to twelve．
　　'We're in time！'said the young man，happily．'Thank you，my friend，and your good horse，too．Take this extra money—'
　　'No，sir，said Jerry．'Thank you，but it isn't necessary．I'm glad we were in time—now hurry and catch your train．'
　　When we got back to the cab stand，the other men were laughing because Jerry had driven hard to the train．
　　'How much extra did he pay you，Jerry？'said one driver．
　　'Nothing，'said Jerry．'He offered me extra but I didn't take it．If Jack and I choose to have a quick run now and then，that's our business and not yours．'
　　'You'll never be a rich man then，'said Larry．
　　'Perhaps not，'said Jerry，'but I'll be a happy one！'
　　'And you，Larry，'added Mr Grant，'will die poor，because you spend too much money on new whips，beating your poor horse until it's exhausted—and then you have to buy another one．'
　　'well，I've never had good luck with my horses，'said Larry．
　　'And you never will，'said Mr Grant．'Good Luck is very careful who she travels with，and mostly chooses those who are kind and sensible．That's my experience，anyway．'
　　He turned round again to his newspaper，and the other men went back to their cabs．
　　* * *
　　Winter came early，with snow，rain or strong winds almost ev－ery day for weeks．Jerry sometimes went to a coffee－shop near the cab stand，and sometimes Dolly came with some hot soup that Polly had made for him．
　　One cold windy day，Dolly was waiting for Jerry to finish his soup when a gentleman came towards us．Jerry started to give the soup bowl back to Dolly and was just going to take off my warm cloth when the man said，'No，no，finish your soup，my friend．I can wait in the cab until you've finished．'Jerry thanked him，then came back to Dolly．
　　'That's a real gentleman'Dolly，'he said．'He has time and thought for the comfort of a poor cab driver．'
　　Jerry finished his soup，then we took the man to Clapham．After that，he took our cab several times，and often came to pat me．It was very unusual for anyone to notice a cab horse，and I was grateful．
　　Another day，the gentleman saw a cart with two horses standing in the street．The driver was not with them and I don't know how long they had been standing there．However，they decided to move on a few steps．
　　Suddenly，the cart driver ran out of a building and caught them．He seemed very angry and began to whip the horses hard，even beating them around the head．
　　Our gentleman saw him and walked quickly across．'Stop that at once，or I'll call the police！'he said．
　　The driver was drunk and he began to shout，but he stopped whipping the horses．Meanwhile，our gentleman wrote down the name and address that was on the side of the cart．
　　'Why do you want that？'shouted the driver．
　　Our gentleman didn't answer．He came back to the cab．'Many people have thanked me fof telling them how their horses have been used，'he told Jerry．
　　'I wish there were more gentlemen like you，sir，said Jerry．'They're needed in this city．'



　　* * *



■ 11 Goodbye to old friends
　　One day we were waiting outside one of the London parks when a dirty old cab drove up beside ours．The horse was brown，with bones that showed through her coat．I was eating some hay and the wind took a little of it her way．The poor animal put out her long thin neck and picked it up，then turned and looked for more．There was a hopeless look in her dull eye and I wondered where I'd seen her before．Then she looked straight at me．
　　'Black Beauty，is that you？'she said．
　　It was Ginger！But how different she looked！Her face，which was once so full of life，was now miserable and full of pain，and her breathing was very bad．
　　I moved closer to her so that we could have a quiet talk，and it was a sad story that she told me．After twelve months'rest at Earlshall she was considered to be ready to work again，and was sold to a gentleman．She got on well for a little while，but after a long gallop one day，she became ill again．She was rested，was seen by a horse-doctor，then sold．In this way，she went from owner to owner several times，each one poorer than the one before．
　　'So at last I was bought by a man who keeps a number of cabs and horses，and hires them out，'said Ginger．'You look happy and comfortable with life as a cab horse，and I'm glad，but it's different for me． They whip me and work me seven days a week．They say that they paid more for me than I was worth，and now they're trying to get their money back by working me until I drop．'
　　'You used to stand up and fight when people were cruel to you， 'I said．
　　'Yes，I did once，'said Ginger．' But men are stronger than we are，and if they're cruel and have no feelings， then there's nothing we can do about it．Oh，I wish the end would come．I wish I was dead． '
　　I was very sad．I put my nose against hers but could find nothing to say that would cheer her up．I think she was pleased to see me，because she said，'You're the only friend I ever had．'
　　A few weeks after this，a cart with a dead horse in it passed by our cab stand．It was a brown horse with a long thin neck，and I believe it was Ginger．I hoped it was，because then her troubles would be over．
　　* * *
　　There was one day when we were very busy．First a fat gentle-man with a large bag wanted to go to Bishopsgate Station；then we were called by a lady who wanted to be taken to Regent's Park；then a man jumped into the cab and called out，'Bow Street Police Station， quick！'
　　After another journey or two，we came back to the cab stand and Jerry gave me some food，saying，'We must eat when we can on days like this，Jack．'And he took out the meat and bread Polly had given him．
　　But neither of us had eaten many mouthfuls before a poor young woman came along the street．She was carrying a child and she looked lost and worried．
　　'Can you tell me the way to St Thomas's Hospital，please？'she asked．'I have to take my little boy there，and I'm a stranger in London．'The little boy was crying as she spoke．'He's in great pain and can't walk，but the doctor says that if I can get him to the hospital，then perhaps he'll get well again．
　　'You can't carry him through the crowds，' said Jerry．' It's five kilometres，and that child is heavy．'
　　I'm strong，'said the woman．'I think I can manage，if I know the way．' 'You can't do it．Just get into this cab and I'll drive you there．Don't you see that it's beginning to rain？'
　　'No，sir，I can't do that，'she said．'I've only just enough money to get me home again．'
　　'Listen，'said Jerry．' I've got a wife and children at home，and I'd be ashamed of myself if I let a woman and a sick child put themselves in danger．Get in the cab and I'll take you for nothing．'
　　'Oh，how kind you are！'said the woman， and began to cry．
　　Jerry opened the door but two men ran up，calling out，'Cab！'
　　'It's taken，'said Jerry，but one man pushed past the wom-an and jumped in，followed by the other．'This cab is already taken，gentlemen，'Jerry said again，'by this lady．'
　　'Lady！'said one of the men unpleasantly，looking at the woman's poor clothes．'She can wait．Our business is very im－portant，and anyway，we were in first，and we'll stay in．'
　　A smile came over Jerry's face as he shut the cab door．'Stay in as long as you like， gentlemen．I can wait while you rest yourselves．'He walked over to the young woman who was standing nearby．'They'll soon be gone，don't worry，'he said， laughing．
　　And he was right．When the two men realized that they were going to have a very long wait， they got out， calling Jerry all kinds of bad names． After this， we were soon on our way to the hospital．
　　'Thank you a thousand times，' said the young woman， as Jerry helped her out of the cab．
　　'I hope your child will soon be better，' said Jerry．He watched her go in，then patted my neck．It was something he always did when he was pleased．
　　The rain was now coming down fast and，just as we were leaving the hospital， a lady came down the steps calling，'Cab！'Jerry seemed to know her at once．
　　'Jerry Barker，is it you？' said the woman．'I'm very glad to find you here．It's difficult to get a cab in this part of London today．'
　　'I'll be proud to take you，'said Jerry．'Where do you want to go？'
　　'Paddington Station，'said the woman．
　　We got to the station and went in under cover．The lady stood beside the cab talking to Jerry for some time，and I dis-covered that she was once Polly's mistress．
　　'How do you like cab work in the winter？'she asked Jerry．'Polly was worried about your cough last year．'
　　'She worries because I work all hours and in all kinds of weather，'said Jerry．'But I get on all right，and I would be lost without horses to look after．'
　　'It would be wrong to harm your health in this work when you have a wife and two children，'said the lady．'There are many places where good drivers or grooms are wanted．If you ever decide to give up cab work，let me know．'She put some-thing into his hand．'There's some money for the children．'
　　Jerry thanked her and，after leaving the station，we went
　　* * *
　　Christmas and the New Year are no holidays for cab drivers and their horses．People go to parties and dances，and th6 work is often late Sometimes driver and horse have to wait for hours，shaking with cold．
　　We had a lot of late work during Christmas week and Jerry's cough was bad．On New Year's Eve we took two gentlemen to a house in the West End，and were told to come for them at eleven'o clock．'You may have to wait a few minutes，but don't be late，'one of them said．
　　Jerry arrived at the right time and we waited．The wind was very cold and it was snowing．Jerry pulled one of my cloths higher over my neck， then walked up and down， trying to keep warm．
　　At half－past twelve，Jerry rang the door－bell and asked if the gentlemen still wanted the cab．The man at the door said，'Oh，yes，you'll be wanted．'
　　At one o'clock the door opened and two men came out．They got in the cab without a word，and told Jerry where to drive．It was three kilometres away，and when the men got out they didn't say they were sorry for the long wait，but they were angry when Jerry made them pay for the extra waiting time．But it was money hard-earned．
　　When we got home，Jerry could not speak，and his cough was terrible，but he groomed me and made sure that I was warm and comfortable．
　　It was late the next morning before anyone came， and then it was only Harry．He cleaned us and gave us our food but was very quiet． Later that morning he came again， and this time Dolly came with him．She was crying，and I discovered from their conversation that Jerry was dangerously ill．
　　Two days passed， and only Harry and Dolly came to the sta-ble．On the third day，Mr Grant from the cab stand arrived when Harry was in the stable．'I won't go to the house，boy，but how is your father？'he said．
　　'He's very bad，'said Harry．
　　'I'm sorry to hear that，'said Mr Grant．'He's the best man I know．'
　　But when he came the next day，Harry was able to tell him，'Father is better today．Mother hopes he will get over it soon．'
　　'Thank God！' said Mr Grant． He was a kind man， and did a lot to help the family during this time，because while Jerry was ill，he was earning no money，and we all had to eat．
　　Jerry got slowly better，but the doctor said he must never do cab work again．The children talked a lot about what their mother and father would do，but a few days later Dolly ran into the stable to find Harry．
　　'There's a letter from Mrs Fowler，mother's old mistress！'said Dolly．'She wants father to be her carriage driver，and we're going to live in a cottage in the country——with chick-ens，and apple trees，and everything！'
　　This was bad news for me．I was not young now，and could not hope for a better master than Jerry，although Mr Grant promised to find a comfortable place for me．
　　I never saw Jerry again and was very sorry to leave．



　　* * *
　　* * *



■ 12 Hard times
　　I was sold to a baker who Jerry knew，but the baker's bearing rein up．This made it difficult for me to pull a heavy cart，and I found the work very hard．
　　One day，after three or four months of this，I was pulling the cart，which was much heavier than usual，up a steep hill．I had to stop several times to rest，which didn't please Jakes．
　　'Move on， you lazy horse， or I'll make you！'he shouted，and he hit me with his whip．
　　After a few more metres，I had to stop again．The whip came down across my back once more and the pain was sharp．I was doing my best but the driver was still punishing me cruelly，which seemed very unfair．
　　Jakes was whipping me a third time when a woman hurried over and said，'Oh，please don't whip your horse like that． I think I can help，if you'll let me．'
　　Jakes laughed．'Oh？'
　　'He can't use all his strength when his head is held back with that bearing rein，'the woman went on．'If you take it off，I'm sure he'll do better．'
　　'Anything to please a lady，'said Jakes，smiling．
　　The rein was taken off and I moved my head up and down several times to help my aching neck．
　　'Poor boy，is that what you wanted？'said the woman， pat-ting me．She turned to Jakes．'If you speak to him kindly and lead him on，I believe he'll do better．'
　　Jakes took the rein，and I put down my head and moved on．I pulled the cart up the hill， then stopped to take a breath．
　　'Well， that helped，' said Jakes，'but if I went without a bearing rein all the time，the other cart drivers would laugh at me．It's fashionable，you see．'
　　'It's better to start a good fashion than to follow a bad one，'said the woman．'Many gentlemen don't use bearing reins now．'
　　She gave me another pat on the neck and walked on．
　　After that，Jakes always took off my bearing rein when I was going up a hill，and that made my life easier．But pulling heavy carts day after day slowly began to exhaust me and a younger horse was brought in to do my work．
　　* * *
　　I was sold to another cab owner whose name was Nicholas Skinner．He was hard on his drivers，and they were hard on the horses．We worked long hours，had no Sunday rest，and it was a hot summer．
　　My driver was just as hard as his master，and he had a cruel whip with something sharp at the end which often cut me and made me bleed．It was a terrible life，and sometimes，like poor Ginger，I wished I was dead．
　　One day I nearly got my wish．
　　We were at the railway station when a family of four people hired us There was a noisy man with a lady，a little boy，a young girl， and a lot of heavy luggage．
　　'Father，'said the young girl，'this poor horse can't take us and all our luggage．He's too tired．'
　　'Oh， he's all right， miss！'said my driver．He put a heavy box on the cab with the other luggage．
　　'Father，please take a second cab，'said the girl．'I'm sure this is very cruel．'
　　'Grace，get in at once，and don't be stupid，'said her father．'The driver knows his own business．'
　　My gentle friend had to obey，and box after box was lifted up and put on the top of the cab，or next to the driver．Then the driver hit me with his whip and we moved out of the sta-tion． The cab was very heavy and I had not eaten or rested since early that morning．I did my best and got along quite well un-til we came to Ludgate Hill．By then I was exhausted，and the heavy cab was too much for me．My feet went from under me and I fell heavily，knocking all the breath out of me．I lay quite still because I could not move．Indeed， I expected to die．
　　There were angry voices above me and luggage was taken off the cab，but it was all like a dream．I tnought I heard the girl's voice saying，'Oh，that poor horse！It's all our fault！'
　　Someone loosened my bridle and collar，and another voice said，'He's dead，he'll never get up again．'I heard a police－man giving orders but I did not open my eyes．Cold water was thrown over my head，some medicine was put into my mouth，and I was covered with a cloth．
　　I don't know how long I was there，but a man with a kind voice persuaded me to try to get up and I managed it．Then I was gently led to some stables close by．
　　That evening，I was taken back to Skinner's stables，and the next morning the horse-doctor came to see me．
　　'He's been worked too hard，'said the doctor．'There's no strength left in him．'
　　'Then he must go for dog food，'said Skinner．'I have no fields for sick horses．It doesn't suit my business．I work them for as long as they'll go，then I sell them for what I can get．'
　　'There's a horse fair in ten days' time，' said the doctor．'If you rest him and give him food， he may get better，and then you may get more than his skin's worth．'
　　Luckily for me，Skinner took the doctor's advice and，after rest and food，I began to feel better．Ten days later， I was taken to the horse fair，a few miles outside London．



　　* * *



■ 13 My last home
　　I was sold to a farmer at the horse fair，but it was his young grandson who persuaded him to buy me．
　　The two of them walked past me and，seeing kindness in the farmer's face， I lifted my head， put my ears forward and tried to look my best．
　　The farmer stopped and looked at me．'There's a horse，Willie， that has known better days，'he said．
　　'Poor thing！'said the boy．'Do you think he was ever a car-riage horse，grandfather？'
　　'Oh，yes，' said the farmer．'Look at his fine head and the shape of his neck and shoulder．'He reached out a hand and patted me on the neck．I put out my nose in answer to his kindness，and the boy gently put his hand against my face．
　　'Look how well he understands kindness，'said the boy．'Won't you buy him，and make him young and strong again？'
　　The man who was selling me said，'The boy can recognize a good horse，sir．This one isn't old，just tired and thin from too much work．In six months，he'll be fine．'
　　Five pounds changed hands and，soon after，I was taken to my new home．The farmer gave orders for me to have hay and oats every night and morning，and I was let out into a large field in the daytime．Willie，the young boy，was responsible for me， and he came to see me every day， bringing carrots or apples．
　　During that winter，the rest，the good food，the soft grass and gentle running and trotting all helped to make me feel quite young again．When the spring came，the farmer tried me with a carriage， and I did the work quite easily．
　　'He's growing young，Willie，' he said．'We'll give him some gentle work and look for a good home for him．'
　　* * *
　　One day during this summer，the groom cleaned and dressed me with special care，and Willie seemed half-worried and half-excited as he got into the carriage with his grandfather．
　　'I hope the ladies like him，'said the farmer．
　　A kilometre or two beyond the village，we came to a pretty house，and Willie went to knock on the door．He asked if Miss Blomefield and Miss Ellen were at home．They were，and Willie stayed with me while the farmer went into the house．He came back about ten minutes later with three ladies．They seemed to like me， but one of them， worried by my knees， won-dered if I was safe．
　　'It's true his knees were broken once，'said the farmer，'but we don't know why he fell．It was probably a careless driver，and not the horse's fault at all． He seems very safe to me．If you like him，you can try him for a few weeks，'he went on．'Then your driver will see what he thinks of him．'
　　One of the three ladies—a tall， white－faced lady， who held the arm of a younger woman—said，'You have always given us good advice about our horses， so we accept your offer to try him．'
　　The next morning， a young man came for me．He looked pleased until he saw my knees， then he said，'I'm surprised you suggested this horse to my ladies．'
　　'You're only taking him to try him，' said the farmer．'If he's not as safe as any horse you ever drove， send him back，young man．'
　　I was taken to a comfortable stable， given some food， then left to myself
　　The next day， the groom was cleaning my face when he said，'That's just like the star that Black Beauty had on his forehead．I wonder where he is now．'He looked more closely at me．'White star on the forehead，one white foot—and a lit－tle white place on his back！It must be Black Beauty！Beauty！Do you know me？I'm little Joe Green，who almost killed yon！'And he began patting me all over my back．
　　I could not say I remembered him，as he was now a fine young man with a black moustache and a deep voice．But I was sure he knew me， and that he was Joe Green， and I was very glad．I put my nose up to him and tried to say that we were friends．I never saw a man so pleased．
　　That afternoon， I was harnessed to a carriage for Miss Ellen to try me．Joe Green went with her and told her that he was sure I was Mr Gordon's old Black Beauty．
　　'I shall write to Mrs Gordon and tell her that her favourite horse has come to us，'said Miss Ellen．'How pleased she will be！'
　　I have now lived in this happy place a whole year．Joe is the best and kindest of grooms．My work is easy and pleasant，and I feel my strength coming back again．
　　The ladies have promised that they will never sell me， and so I have nothing to fear；and here my story ends．My troubles are all over，and I am at home；and often，before I am quite awake，I dream I am still in the field at Birtwick，standing with my old friends under the apple trees．



　　* * *

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Silas Marner by George Eliot





■ 1 Silas Marner，past and present
　　In the early years of the nineteenth century，Strange-looking little men were often seen on the country roads，usually with a heavy bag on their shoulders．They were linen－weavers，taking the linen they had woven to the women in the villages．Unlike the strong，healthy country people，they were small and thin，with tired white faces，bent backs and round shoulders．They were often shortsighted too，because they had to look so closely at their work．To the villagers the weavers looked almost foreign，and quite frightening．Where did they come from？Was it the devil who sent them？Who were their parents？How could you trust a man if you didn't know his father or mother？Country people used to be very suspicious of all strangers and travellers．They were also suspi-cious of clever people，people who could do something they themselves had not learnt to do．That is why the linen－weavers，who often moved from towns to live and work in the country，were considered strangers all their lives by their neighbours，and were sometimes very lonely as a result.
　　Silas Marner was one of these weavers．He lived in a small cottage near the village of Raveloe．Every day he worked at his loom in the cottage．The small boys of Raveloe had never heard the sound of a loom before，and sometimes they used to run up to his house to look quickly in at the window．If Silas noticed them，he lifted his shortsighted eyes from the loom to stare at the boys．There was something terrible about his stare，which made the boys run away at once，screaming with fear．The vil－lagers believed that Silas had an almost devilish power，which he could use to harm them if he wanted，and so they were all afraid of him．Raveloe was an important－looking village with a fine old church and a number of large farms．But it was at least an hour away from any other village，and very few strangers visited it，which explains why the villagers'opinions were so out of date．
　　Silas Marner had first come to Raveloe fifteen years before，as a young man．He and his way of life seemed very strange to the villagers．He worked long hours at his loom，and had no friends or visitors from the village or anywhere else．He never talked to his neighbours unless it was necessary for his work，and he never looked at any of the Raveloe girls．'Who would want to marry him anyway？'the girls laughed to each other．'Marry a dead man come to life again，with that unhealthy white skin and those insect－like eyes of his？Certainly not！'
　　One of the villagers had had a strange experience with Silas．One evening he had discovered the weaver resting on a field gate，his eyes open but unseeing，and his body cold and hard，like a dead man's．After a few moments Silas appeared to wake up，said'Good night'，and walked away．
　　When this was discussed in the village，some people thought that Silas had had a fit．But others，like Mr Macey，the church clerk，refused to accept a medical explanation．
　　'No，he isn't ill，that weaver，'said old Mr Macey，shaking his head knowingly．'If he had a fit，he'd fall down，wouldn't he？I think his soul flies out of his body sometimes and that's why he looks so strange．He doesn't come to church，does he？And how does he know so much about medicines？You all re－member how he made Sally Oates better，when the doctor him-self could do no more for her．That's the devil's work，believe me！'
　　However，the housewives needed Silas to weave their linen，and they could find nothing wrong with his work．The years passed，and Raveloe villagers did not change their opinion of the weaver．At the end of fifteen years they said exactly the same things about him，but they believed them more strongly．They also said that he had saved up a lot of money since he had come to Raveloe．
　　Silas had come from a large town to the north of Raveloe．Here he had lived a very different life．Because he was one of a large number of weavers，he was not considered strange，and he belonged to an enthusiastic religious group．They met every Sunday at the chapel in Light Street．Once，at a chapel meeting，Silas had become unconscious and had sat without moving，hearing or seeing，for over an hour．This experience made him specially interesting to the rest of the group．
　　'We should not call this strange unconsciousness a fit，'the minister，Mr Paston，told them．'No， it's much more than that．In that moment，when he is absent from us，our young friend Silas's soul is open，open to a possible message from God．I believe he has been chosen by God！'
　　silas's best friend at chapel was William Dane，a serious young man who was，some people thought，a little too sure of his own goodness and cleverness．Silas，however，could see no fault in him，and trusted his friend completely．They remained good friends，when Silas became engaged to a young woman，Sarah，who belonged to the same chapel．In fact Silas was de－lighted that Sarah did not mind if William joined them some－times on their Sunday walks．
　　Strangely，when Silas had his fit at the chapel meeting，William was the only one who disagreed with the minister．
　　'To me it looks more like the devil's work than God's，'William had said．'Look deep into yourself，friend Silas．Is there any evil hiding in your soul？'
　　Silas was hurt that his friend doubted him，and he began to be worried，too，about Sarah．She seemed to be showing signs of dislike towards him，but when he asked her about it，she did not give him any answer．
　　At that time one of the chapel leaders was dangerously ill，and because he had no family，some of the young men offered to sit with him at night．One night Silas was sitting alone at the old man's bedside．Time seemed to pass slowly in the quiet，dark room．But suddenly he realized that the man was no longer breathing．He was dead．
　　'Strange！'thought Silas．'His body's cold！He's been dead for some time！Why did't I notice？Perhaps I've had anoth－er fit．And it's already four o'clock in the morning．Why hasn't William come？He promised he'd come at two o'clock！'He hurried out of the house to call the doctor and the minister，and then went to work as usual，still wondering why William had not arrived．
　　But that evening，after work，William came to his room，with the minister．They were both looking very serious．
　　'You must come to the chapel at once，'said Mr Paston．
　　'But why？'asked Silas，looking unhappily at them．
　　'You will hear when you get there，was the only answer．
　　Then，in the chapel，Silas stood alone，in front of all the peo－ple who were once his friends．The room was silent．There was a pocket－knife in the minister's hand．
　　'Where did you leave this knife？'he asked．
　　Silas was trembling at this strange question．I don't re－member，'he answered．
　　'Silas，Silas，you must confess！'cried the minister．'Tell us the truth！This knife，your knife，was found at the dead man's bedside，and the bag of church money，which I saw there myself only yesterday，has gone！
　　Silas did not speak for a moment．Then he said，'God knows I did not steal the money．Search my room－you won't find the money．I'm not a thief．'
　　'You were the only one in our dead friend's house last night，when the money was stolen，'said Mr Paston．'William tells us he was suddenly ill，which prevented him from coming to take your place．We will search your room．
　　And when they went to Silas's room，Willia m fond the missing bag，now empty，under Silas's bed．
　　'Silas，my friend，'cried William，'confess your crime to us now！Send the devil away from your soul！'
　　Silas turned to the man he had always trusted．'William，in the nine years since we've been friends，have I ever told you a lie？But God will prove the truth．'
　　As he looked at William，he suddenly remembered something，and reddened．He said in a trembling voice，'The knife wasn't in my pocket last night！'
　　'I don't know what you mean，'replied William coldly．
　　In the strange little world of the Light Street chapel，they did not believe in the law or judges．They thought only God knew the answers，so they agreed to draw lots to decide what had happened．They all went down on their knees to ask for God's help in finding th truth．Silas knelt with them，sure that God would prove his honesty．There was silence，as the minister took one of the papers out of the covered box．
　　'The lots say that Silas Marner has stolen the money，'he said．'You will leave the chapel，Silas Marner，and you will not be accepted back until you confess your crime．'
　　Silas listened in horror．At last he walked over to William Dane and said firmly，'I lent you my knife，you know that．You stole the money，while I was having a fit，and you've blamed me for it．But perhaps you'll never be punished，since there is no God who takes care of the good and punishes the bad，only a God of lies．'
　　'You hear，my friends？'said William，smiling sadly．' This is the voice of the devil speaking．'
　　Silas went home．The next day he sat alone for the whole day，too miserable to do anything．On the second day the min－ ister came to tell him that Sarah had decided she could not marry him．Only a month later，Sarah married William Dane，and soon afterwards Silas Marner left the town．
　　At Raveloe，Silas shut himself away in his cottage．He did not want to think about the disaster he had experienced．He could not understand why God had refused to help him．But now that his trust in God and his friends had been broken， he did not feel strong enough to build up that trust again，in a new church and with new friends．From now on，he would live in a dark，loveless，hopeless world．
　　All that was left to him was his weaving，and he sat at his loom seven days a week，working all the daylight hours．In the town he had earned less，and had given much of his money to the chapel，for the old，the poor，and the sick．But now he be－gan to earn more than ever before，and there was no reason for him to give away any of it．He was often paid for his linen in gold．He discovered that he liked holding the shining coins in his hand and looking at their bright faces．
　　In his childhood，Silas had been taught，by his mother，to make simple medicines from wild flowers and plants．One day he saw the shoemaker's wife，Sally Oates，sitting at her cottage door，and he realized she had all the signs of the illness which had killed his mother．He felt sorry for Sally，and although he knew he could not prevent her dying，he prepared some medicine for her which made her feel much better．The vil－lagers considered this a good example of Silas's strange，fright－ening power，but as it had worked for Sally，they started visit-ing Silas to ask for help with their own illnesses．But Silas was too honest to take their money and give them useless medicine．He knew he had no special power，and so he sent them away．The villagers believed he was refusing to help them，and they were angry with him．They blamed him for accidents that hap－pened to them，and deaths in the village．So poor Silas's kind－ness to Sally did not help him make friends in Raveloe．
　　But little by little，the piles of gold coins in his cottage grew higher．The harder he worked，the less he spent on himself．He counted the coins into piles of ten，and wanted to see them grow into a square，and then into a larger square．He was de－lighted with every new coin，but it made him want another．His gold became a habit，a delight，a reason for living，almost a reli－gion．He began to think the coins were his friends，who made the cottage less lonely for him．But it was only at night， when he had finished his work，that he spent time with them．He kept them in two bags，under the floorboards near the loom．Like a thirsty man who needs a drink，he took them out every evening to look at them，feel them，and count them．The coins shone in the firelight，and Silas loved every one of them．When he looked at his loom，he thought fondly of the half－earned gold in the work he was doing，and he looked forward to the years ahead of him，the countless days of weaving and the growing piles of gold．






■ 2 Godfrey and Dunstan Cass
　　The most important person in Raveloe was Squire Cass， a gentleman farmer，who lived with his three sons in the handsome Red House opposite the church，and owned a num-her of farms outside the village．His wife had died many years before．
　　One dark November evening，fifteen years after Silas Marner had first arrived in Raveloe，some of the villagers were drinking beer in the public house，the Rainbow．Old Mr Macey，the church clerk，was remembering the Squire's wife．
　　'She was a wonderful lady，'he said，shaking his grey head sadly．'Everything was always so pretty and clean at the Red House when she was alive！When she died，all those years ago，the poor Squire，well，he didn't know what to do．And he's still lonely，believe me！That's why we often see him in here in the evenings．And another thing，if poor Mrs Cass were alive today，I'm sure she'd be very disappointed with her sons．The Squire should make those boys do some work，but in－stead he lets them stay at home and gives them money to spend on horses，or gambling，or women！ '
　　'Come，come，Mr Macey，'said the landlord．'They're rich young gentlemen，after all．You can't expect them to work on the farms like us country people．But you're right about Dun－stan Cass．He's a bad one，he is．Always borrowing money，and never paying it back．Always gambling，always in trouble！He'll come to a bad end，he will！'
　　'But the other two are different，'said the butcher，a red-faced，smiling man．'Bob Cass is still only a boy．And Mr God-frey，the eldest，well，I don't believe he'll be like his brother Dunstan．Just look at him！He's got an open，honest face．And he's going to inherit the Squire's money and all the land．And what's more，he's going to marry Miss Nancy Lammeter．When she moves into the Red House as Mrs Godfrey Cass，she'll make life more comfortable for all the Casses．She'll save the Squire money too—the Lammeters have the best of every－thing in their house，but they're very careful with their money．'
　　The farrier，a small man with a sharp face，always enjoyed disagreeing with the butcher．'Mr Godfrey marry Miss Nancy！'he laughed．'That's what you think！Haven't you noticed how Miss Nancy has changed towards Godfrey since last year？You remember，he was away from home，for days and days．Nobody knows what he was doing，but Godfrey hasn't been the same since then．Miss Nancy isn't stupid—she won't marry a man she can't trust！'
　　The landlord always tried to prevent his customers from ar-guing．'What you all say is very true．But let's hope that Mr Godfrey doesn't lose his chance of marrying Miss Nancy．'
　　Meanwhile，at the Red House，Godfrey Cass was waiting for his brother in the sitting－room，with a very worried expression on his handsome face．Soon the door opened，and a heavy-look-ing young man entered．It was Dunstan．He had clearly been drinking．
　　'How I hate him！'thought Godfrey．
　　'Well，sir，'said Dunstan unpleasantly，'you sent for me，and as you're the oldest，and you'll be the Squire one day，I have to obey you．So what do you want？'
　　'Just listen，will you？'replied Godfrey angrily，'if you aren't too drunk to understand！You must pay me back the money I lent you last month．You know I got it from Fowler，of Church Farm．He owed the money to the Squire，and asked me to give it to him．Now the Squire is angry with Fowler for not paying，and I've got to give the money back！'
　　Dunstan came close to Godfrey and smiled in an evil way．'Well，my dear kind brother，why don't you find the money yourself？That would be much less trouble for me！'
　　Godfrey controlled himself with difficulty．'Don't smile at me like that，or I'll hit you！'
　　'Oh no，you won't，answered Dunstan．'Because if you do，I'll tell the Squire your secret．I'll tell him that his handsome eldest son fell in love with that poor girl Molly in the town，and married her in a hurry．The Squire'll be angry because you married her in secret，and he'll disinherit you．Then I'll get the house and land when the old man dies！But don't worry，I'm a good brother to you．I won't tell him，and you'll find the money to pay back，I know you will．'
　　'Where can I get the money from？'cried Godfrey．'I tell you，I haven't got any！'
　　'You could borrow It，'said Dunstan carelessly．'Or wait-I've had a better idea．You could sell your horse．'
　　'Sell Wildfire！You know how muchl love that horse！'
　　'Well，you could ride him to the hunt tomorrow．I know two or three men who'd be interested in buying him，and they'll be at the hunt，I'm sure．It'd be easy．'
　　'No，I haven't got time to go hunting tomorrow．I-I'm going to Mrs Osgood's birthday dance．'
　　'Aha！'said Dunstan，laughing．'And perhaps you'll see sweet Miss Nancy there—and you'll dance with her－and you'll talk of love…'
　　'Be quiet！'shouted Godfrey，his face turning red．'Don't speak of Miss Nancy like that，or I'll kill you！'
　　'Don't get so angry，brother，'answered Dunstan calmly．'You've got a very good chance with her．In fact，I advise you to be nice to her．You and I know that Molly's started drink ing．Well，if she drinks too much one day and dies，then you could marry Nancy．She wouldn't mind being a second wife，if she didn't know there was a first．And luckily you've got a kind brother who'll keep your secret well．'
　　Godfrey's face was white now，and he was trembling．'Look，Dunstan，I've nearly had enough of this．You can push a man too far，you know．Perhaps I'll go to the Squire now and confess everything to him．He'll discover the truth one day，because Molly says she'll come and tell him．She wants every－one to know we re married．When the Squire knows the truth，you won't get any more money from me！'
　　Dunstan replied lightly，'Do what you like，brother．'
　　Godfrey hesitated．He knew he had fallen into Dunstan's trap，when he made the mistake of marrying Molly．It was Dunstan who had Introduced his brother to Molly，hoping that Godfrey would fall in love and marry her．Dunstan was clearly delighted that his evil plan had succeeded．Godfrey was now in a difficult situation．He no longer loved his young wife，and could not stop thinking of Nancy Lammeter．He felt sure that with Nancy as his wife he would not need to have secrets，and could be open and honest with everybody．But for the moment he had to give Dunstan whatever he wanted，keep Molly happy，and lie to his father and his friends．If he told his father the truth，the situation would become impossible．The Squire would disinherit him and he would be just a poor working man for the rest of his life．And far worse than that，he would lose any hope of marrying Nancy．No！He could not accept that．He would find the money for Dunstan，and wait for the situa－tion to get better．Living with fear in his heart，the fear of be－ing discovered，was better than living without Nancy's love．
　　He turned to Dunstan．'It's just like you to talk of selling Wildfire—the best horse I've ever had！'
　　'Let me sell him for you-you know I'm good at buying and selling．I can ride him to the hunt for you tomorrow，and bring you back the money．But you must decide．You lent me that money，and you'll have to pay it back to the Squire．So it's your problem，not mine！'
　　Godfrey thought for a moment．'All right，'he said．'But make sure you bring me back all the money，Dunstan！'
　　The next morning，as Dunstan was riding Wildfire out of Rav－eloe，he passed the old quarry．All the stone had been taken out of it and it was no longer used；now all that was left was a deep hole full of reddish water．Opposite the quarry was Silas Marn－er's cottage．Dunstan suddenly had an idea．'Everybody in Raveloe talks of the weaver's money—he must have a lot hid－den away in that cottage！Why doesn't Godfrey borrow some money from him，and pay him back when he becomes the Squire？'He wondered whether to go back to the Red House at once，to tell Godfrey about this wonderful idea of his，but he did not want to miss the hunt，so he decided to continue on his way．
　　At the hunt he met several friends and neighbours，and be fore the hunt started he managed to sell Wildfire for a good price．The money would be paid when he brought the horse to the neighbour's house later that day．Dunstan knew it would be safer to take the horse there immediately，so that he could be sure of receiving the money．But he was confident that he could take care of Wildfire during the hunt，and so，after a glass or two of whisky，he joined the other riders in the fields．This time，however，he was not as lucky as usual，and horse and rid-er fell while jumping a gate．Dunstan got up，shaken but unhurt，but poor Wildfire's back was broken，and in a few mo－ments he died．
　　Dunstan looked around，and was glad to see that no other riders had noticed his accident．He did not want people to think he was a bad rider．He did not care much about Wildfire，be－cause he thought he now had a much better plan to offer God－frey．The worst thing was that he would have to walk home，something he was not at all used to doing．
　　He drank some more whisky from the bottle he kept in his pocket，and started down the country road．He kept thinking about Silas's money．There would certainly be enough for his own needs as well as Godfrey's．Dunstan thought it would be easy to frighten the weaver a little，and then Silas would quick－ly agree to lend his money．
　　It was four o'clock in the afternoon，and the whole country－side was covered by a thick mist．Dunstan did not see anyone on his way back to Raveloe．He knew he was getting close to the old quarry，although he could not see the road in front of him．At last he saw light coming from the weaver's cottage，and he decided to knock at the door．'Why not ask the old man for the money now？he thought．
　　But when he knocked loudly，there was no reply．And when he pushed the door，it opened．Dunstan found himself in front of a bright fire which showed every corner of the small living-room．Silas Marner was not there．Dunstan was tired and cold，so he went quickly to sit by the warm fire．As he sat down，he noticed a small piece of meat cooking over the fire．It was hanging from a large door key． 'So，the old man's cooking meat for his supper，is he？'thought Dunstan．'But where is he？Why is his door unlocked？Perhaps he went out to fetch some wood for the fire，and fell into the quarry！Perhaps he's dead！'this was an interesting new idea．'And if he's dead，who inherits his mon－ey？Who would know that anybody had come to take it away？'And the most important question of all—'Where is the money？'
　　Dunstan's excitement made him forget that the weaver could still be alive．He wanted Silas to be dead，and he wanted Silas's money．He looked round the cottage again．There was very little furniture，just a bed，the loom，three chairs and a table．Dunstan looked under the bed，but the money was not there．Then he noticed a plsce on the floor，near the loom，where the floorboards looked different．By pulling up one of the boards，he discovered Silas's hiding－place．He took out the two heavy bags filled with gold，put the boards back and hurried to the door．
　　Outside，the rain was falling heavily，and he could not see anything at all．Carrying the heavy bags，he stepped forward into the darkness．






■ 3 Where is Silas's gold？
　　When Dunstan Cass left the cottage，Silas Marner was only a hundred metres away．He was walking home from the village，where he had gone to buy what he needed for his next day's work．His legs were tired，but he felt almost happy．He was looking forward to supper-time，when he would bring out his gold．Tonight he had an extra reason to hurry home．He was going to eat hot meat，which was unusual for him．And it would cost him nothing，because someone had giv-en him a piece of meat as a present．He had left it cooking over the fire．The door key was needed to hold it safely in place，but Silas was not at all worried about leaving his gold in the cot-tage with the door unlocked．He could not imagine that a thief would find his way through the mist，rain and darkness to the little cottage by the quarry．
　　When he reached his cottage and opened the door，he did not notice that anything was different．He threw off his wet coat，and pushed the meat closer to the fire．As soon as he was warm again，he began to think about his gold．It seemed a long time to wait until after supper，when he usually brought out the coins to look at．So he decided to bring out his gold immediate－ly，while the meat was still cooking．
　　But when he took up the floorboards near the loom，and saw the empty hole，he did not understand at once．His heart beat violently as his trembling hands felt all round the hole．There was nothing there！He put his hands to his head and tried to think．Had he put his gold in a different place，and forgotten about it？He searched every corner of his small cottage，until he could not pretend to himself any more．He had to accept the truth－his gold had been stolen！
　　He gave a wild，desperate scream，and stood still for a mo－ment．Then he turned towards his loom，and almost fell into the seat where he always worked．He touched the loom to make sure it，too，had not been stolen．Now he was beginning to think more clearly．'A thief has been here！If I can find him，he'll have to give back my gold！But I was only away for a short time，and there's no sign of anyone entering the cottage．'He wondered whether it was really a thief who had taken his money，or whether it was the same cruel God who had already destroyed his happiness once．But Silas preferred to suspect a thief，who would perhaps return the money．He began to think it must be Jem Rodney，a local poacher，who had known about Silas's money，and who sometimes visited the cottage．Silas felt stronger now that he thought he knew the thief．'I must go and tell the Squire，and the police！'he said to himself．'They'll make Jem give me back the money！'so he hurried out in the rain without a coat，and ran towards the Rainbow．
　　He thought he would find the most important people in Rav－eloe at the public house，but in fact most of them were at Mrs Osgood's birthday dance．There were，however，five villagers at the Rainbow，enjoying an interesting conversation about ghosts，while drinking their beer．
　　'I tell you，people have seen ghosts，'the butcher said．'And I'll tell you where，too．Behind the church！'
　　'That's right，'agreed old Mr Macey．'You young ones aren't old enough to remember，but people have seen ghosts near the church since I was a boy．Oh yes，it's true．'
　　The farrier laughed scornfully．'Ghosts！People imagine they see things on a dark night！You can't make me believe in ghosts！It's a question of fact！There are no ghosts！'
　　'Now，now，'began the lanalord，who always tried to keep the peace，'in some ways you're all wrong，and in some ways you're all right，that's my opinion．There are ghosts，and there aren't，well，that's what people say．And…'
　　Just then Silas's white face appeared suddenly in the door－way．He had run all the way from his cottage，so he could not speak for a moment．He stared silently at the men with his strange staring eyes，looking exactly like a ghost．For a few minutes nobody said anything，while Silas tried to control his breathing．Then the landlord spoke．
　　'What do you want，Master Marner？Come，tell us．'
　　'Robbed！'cried Silas，suddenly able to speak．'I've been robbed！I want the police，and the Squire！'He waved his arms wildly as he spoke．
　　'Hold him，Jem，'said the landlord to the poacher，who was sitting near the door．'I think he's gone mad．'
　　But Jem moved quickly away．'Not me！'he replied．'I don't want anything to do with a ghost！'
　　'Jem Rodney！'cried Silas，turning and staring at the man he suspected．
　　'Yes，Master Marner？'answered Jem，trembling a little．
　　'If it was you who stole my money，'said Silas，going close to Jem，'just give it back to me，and I won't tell the police．Please—just give it back．'
　　'Stole your money！'cried Jem angrily．'I'll throw this glass at you if you accuse me of stealing your money！'
　　'Come now，Master Matner，'said the landlord firmly，tak－ing Silas by the arm．'You must explain what you mean if you want us to believe you．And sit down by the fire to dry your clothes．You're very wet．'
　　'That's right，'said the farrier．'No more staring like a madman．That's what I thought you were at first—not a ghost，of course．'
　　The weaver sat down，in the centre of the little group of men，and told his story．It felt strange but pleasant to him，to talk to his neighbours and tell them his problems．The men re－alized at once that Silas was telling the truth．They had sus－pected him of working for the devil，but they knew now that the devil was no longer taking care of him．
　　'Well，Master Marner，'said the landlord in the end，'you mustn't accuse poor Jem．He sometimes steals a chicken，we all know that，but he's been sitting here drinking with us all evening．So he's not the thief．'
　　'That's right，'said old Mr Macey．'You can't accuse someone who hasn't done anything wrong，Master Marner．'
　　These words brought the past back to Silas，and he remem－bered standing in front of his accusers in the Light Street chapel．He went up to Jem．
　　'I was wrong，'he said miserably．'I'm sorry，Jem．I had no reason to accuse you．But—where can my gold be？'
　　'Perhaps some stranger came to your cottage while you were out，'said the farrier．'But we must report the robbery to the police and the Squire immediately．'
　　Next morning，when the whole village heard about the stolen gold，they all discussed it excitedly．A few people still did not trust Silas or believe his story．Most people，however，were suspicious of the pedlar who had visited Raveloe the month be－fore．Perhaps he had returned to hide near the quarry，and steal the money when Silas left his cottage．Several villagers thought they remembered his evil-looking face，and felt sure he was not honest．
　　Silas himself remembered that the pedlar had come to his cottage door recently．He hoped the pedlar was indeed the thief，because the police could catch him and make him give back the money．His home seemed very empty to him without his gold，and he desperately wanted to get it back．






■ 4 Godfrey is in trouble
　　Godfrey was not very surprised to find that Dunstan had not come home after his day's hunting．Perhaps he was staying the night at a public house．But when Dunstan did not return home the next day，Godfrey began to worry about Wild-fire．He did not trust his brother，and wondered if Dunstan had gone away to spend the money on gambling．So he decided to go to look for him．On the road near Raveloe he met his neigh-bour，John Bryce，who had arranged to buy Wildfire from Dun－stan．
　　'Well，Godfrey，'said Bryce，'did your brother tell you about the horse？'
　　'What do you mean，John？'replied Godfrey quickly．'No，he hasn't been home yet．What's happened to my horse？'
　　'Ah，so he was yours，was he？Dunstan told me you'd giv-en him Wildfire．I was going to buy him，you know．'
　　'What's Dunstan done？Is Wildfire hurt？'asked Godfrey crossly．
　　'Worse than that，'answered Bryce．'I'm afraid your horse is dead． We've only just found him．Your brother rode him to the hunt and the horse fell at a gate and broke his back．So you haven't seen Dunstan since yesterday？'
　　'No，and he'd better not come home now！'replied Godfrey angrily．'How stupid I was to trust him with my horse！'
　　'But where can Dunstan be？I suppose he wasn't hurt，be－cause we didn't find him near the horse．'
　　'Him？'said Godfrey bitterly．'Oh，he'll be all right．He'll never be hurt—he only ever hurts other people！We'll hear of him soon enough，don't worry． '
　　Bryce said goodbye and rode away．Godfrey rode slowly back into Raveloe，thinking about what he would very soon have to do．There was no longer any escape．He must confess the whole truth to his father．For the rest of the day he planned what he would say．He would explain that he had lent Fowler's money to Dunstan，because Dunstan knew his secret．That would be the right moment to tell the Squire about his secret marriage to Molly．'But he'll be very angry！'thought Godfrey．'And when he's angry with people，he just wants to punish them！He won't listen or calm down！But perhaps he'll keep my se-cret—he's so proud of the family name！And if he disinherited me，everyone would talk about it．'
　　When he went to bed that night， Godfrey thought he had decided what to say．But when he woke up in the morning，he could not see any reason to confess to the marriage．Why should he lose the chance of marrying Nancy？ Why should he tell the whole truth now， when perhaps it was not necessary？No，it would be better to go on in the same way as before．Per haps Dunstan would stay away for a while，and then there would be no need to tell his father about Molly．'But today I'll tell the Squire about the money，'he thought．'He'll have to know about that．'
　　Godfrey was already in the dining-room when his father ar-rived for breakfast．The Squire sat down at the head of the table and ordered the servant to bring him some beer．
　　'Haven't you had breakfast yet，Godfrey？'he asked．
　　'Yes，I have，sir，'replied Godfrey，'but I was waiting to speak to you．'
　　'Well，you young people have plenty of time，'answered the Squire．'We older ones have to do all the work．'
　　Godfrey looked straight at his father．'Sir，'he said bravely，'I must tell you－something very unfortunate has happened to Wildfire．'
　　'What！Has he broken a leg？I thought you could ride bet-ter than that！Well，you can't expect me to pay for a new horse．I'm very short of money at the moment．And I'm angry with Fowler－he still hasn't paid me what he owes me．If he doesn't pay today，he'll go to prison！'the Squire's face was red， and he banged angrily on the table as he spoke．
　　'It's worse than breaking a leg，'continued Godfrey miser-ably．'Wildfire's dead．But I don't want you to buy me anoth-er horse．I just feel sorry I can't pay you－you see，sir，the truth is，I'm very sorry，Fowler did pay the money．He gave it to me，and I was stupid enough to let Dunstan have it．And he was going to sell Wildfire and then I was going to repay you the money．'
　　The Squire's face was purple now，and for a moment he could not speak．'You—you let Dunstan have my money？Why did you give it to him？ And why did he want it？Where's Dunstan now？He'll answer my questions， or leave this house！Go and fetch him at once！'
　　'Dunstan hasn't come home，sir．The horse was found dead，and nobody knows where Dunstan is．''Well，why did you let him have my money？ Answer me！'said the Squire，staring angrily at Godfrey．
　　'Well，sir，I don't know，'replied Godfrey，hesitating．He was not good at lying，and was not prepared for his father's questions．
　　'You don't know？'the Squire repeated scornfully．'Well， I know why． I think you've done something wrong， and you've bribed Dunstan to keep it a secret！That's it，isn't it？'
　　The Squire had made a very clever guess，and Godfrey's heart banged in sudden alarm．He was not ready to confess ev－erything yet．'Well，sir，'he said，trying to speak carelessly，'it was just a little business between Dunstan and me． You wouldn't be interested in it，you know．'
　　'How old are you now？Twenty－six？'asked the Squire an－grily．'Old enough to look after your money and mine too！I've been much too generous to you boys， but I'm going to be harder on you all from now on． You've got a weak character，Godfrey， like your poor mother． I think you need a wife who knows what she wants， because you can't decide anything by yourself！When you were thinking of marrying Nancy Lammeter，I agreed， didn't I？Have you asked her or not？She hasn't refused to marry you， has she？'
　　'No，I haven't asked her，'said Godfrey，feeling very hot ad uncomfortable，'but I don't think she'll accept me．'
　　'Don't be stupid， Godfrey！'said the Sqiuire with a scornful laugh．'Any woman would want to marry into our family！Do you want to marry her？'
　　'There's no other woman I want to marry，'said Godfrey，avoiding his father's eyes．
　　'Well，then，let me speak to her father for you，since you aren't brave enough to do it yourself． She's a pretty girl， and intelligent．'
　　'No，sir，please don't say anything at the moment，'said Godfrey quickly．'I must ask her myself．'
　　'Well，ask her then．When you marry her，you'll have to forget about horses and so on．It'll be good for you to do some serious work． You should get married soon．'
　　'Please don't try to hurry things，sir，'begged Godfrey．
　　'I'll do what I like，'said the Squire firmly．'And if you don't do what I want，I'll disinherit you and you can leave the house．Now，if you know where Dunstan's hiding－I expect you do－tell him he needn't come home． He'll pay for his own food from now on．'
　　'I don't know where he is，sir．Anyway，it's you who should tell him to leave home．'
　　'Don't argue with me，Godfrey，'said the Squire，turning back to his breakfast．'Just go and tell the servants to get my horse ready．'
　　Godfrey left the room． He was relieved that his father had not discovered the whole truth However， he was a little wor－ried that the Squire would try to arrange his marriage with Nancy．While he was married to Molly，he could not marry Nancy，although it was his dearest wish．But as usual he was waiting and hoping for some unexpected change in his situation， which would save him from any unpleasantness．






■ 5 Silas's neighbours
　　In the weeks following the robbery，the police tried hard to find the pedlar，because so many people suspected him of being the thief．But there was no sign of him in any of the towns and villages round Raveloe．
　　Nobody was surprised at Dunstan Cass's absence．Once be-fore he had stayed away for six weeks and then come back．No-body imagined he could have anything to do with the robbery．The villagers continued to discuss Silas and his lost gold，but they had no more explanations to offer．
　　Silas himself still had his loom and his work，so he went on weaving But the only thing that had made his life worth living had gone，and now he had nothing to look forward to．A life－time of empty evenings lay ahead of him． He did not enjoy thinking of the money he would earn，because it reminded him of the money he had lost．As he sat weaving，he sometimes used to moan quietly to himself．And in the evenings，as he sat alone in front of the fire，he used to put his head in his hands and moan again．
　　But this disaster had one good result．Little by little，Silas's neighbours realized it was wrong to be suspicious of him． He was just a poor，simple，harmless man，who needed their help．
　　They showed their new opinion of him in many different ways．Some of the women，who were baking cakes and preparing meat for Christmas，brought him presents of food．Some of the men，who had nothing to give him，stopped him in the village to ask about his health，or visited him to discuss the robbery．They often finished their conversation by saying cheerfully，'Now you're the same as the rest of us—we're poor too！Cheer up，Master Marner！If you get ill and can't work any more，the Squire'll give you food and your neigh－bours will take care of you．'this did not make Silas feel better，but he realized it was meant kindly．
　　Old Mr Macey，the church clerk，came to the cottage one day，to explain how his opinion of the weaver had changed．
　　'You see，Master Marner，'he said in his high old voice，'I used to think you worked for the devil—you've always looked strange，you know．But now I'm sure you're not evil，just a lit-tle bit crazy．That's what I tell the neighbours．'
　　He stopped to give Silas time to reply，but the weaver did not speak．He was sitting with his head in his hands as usual．He knew that the old man was trying to be kind，but he was too miserable to show any interest．
　　'Come，Master Marner， what's your answer to that？'asked Mr Macey， a little impatiently．
　　'Oh，'said Silas，slowly lifting his head，'thank you． Thank you for your kindness．'
　　'That's all right，'replied the old man，pleased． 'Now， you shouldn't sit here moaning，you know． Here's my advice to you．Ask Tookey in the village to make you a Sunday suit—I don't expect you've got one—and then you can come to church with your neighbours．It'll make you feel better．You're not an old man yet，although you look like one． How old were you when you came here first？ Twenty-five？'
　　'I don't remember，'answered Silas，shaking his head．
　　That evening，Mr Macey told a number of villagers at the Rainbow，'Poor Master doesn't know how old he is！And I don't suppose he knows what day of the week it is！He really is a bit crazy．'
　　Another villager，Dolly Winthrop，was also worried about Silas's absence from church．She was a large，fresh-faced wom－an with a sweet，patient smile，who was always busy from early morning until late at night，and who went to church herself ev－ery Sunday．She believed in helping her neighbours，and if someone in Raveloe was ill or dying，Dolly was often asked to take care of the patient．This good，sensible woman decided that Silas needed her help．So one Sunday afternoon she took her son Aaron，a pretty little boy of seven， to visit the weaver．As they came closer to the cottage，they heard the sound of the loom．
　　'Oh dear！Working on a Sunday！That's bad！'said Mrs Winthrop sadly．She had to knock loudy on the door before Silas heard．He said nothing，but opened the door to let them in，and Dolly sat down in an armchair．
　　'I was baking yesterday，Master Marner，'she said， 'and I've brought you some of my cakes．Here they are．'
　　'Thank you，'replied Silas，taking the little bag of cakes Dolly was holding out to him．Aaron was hiding behind his mother's chair，in childish fear of the weaver．
　　'You didn't hear the church bells this morning，perhaps，Master Marner？'dolly asked gently．'This cottage is a long way from the village．'
　　'Yes，I heard them，'answered Silas．For him Sunday bells did not mean anything．There had been no bells at the Light Street chapel．
　　'Oh！'said Dolly．'But—but do you have to work on a Sun－day？ You could make Sunday different from the other days，you know， by washing yourself，and cooking a little piece of meat，and going to church．And Master Marner，Christmas Day will be here soon！If you put on your best clothes and go to church and see the flowers and hear the singing，you'll feel much better！You'll know there is Someone you can trust！'
　　Dolly did not usually talk so much，but the matter seemed extremely important to her．
　　'No，no，'silas replied．'I don't know anything about church．I've never been to church．'
　　'Never been！'repeated Dolly．'Were there no churches in the town you were born in？'
　　'Oh yes，'said Silas，'there were a lot of churches．It was a big town，you see．But I only ever went to chapel．'
　　Dolly did not understand this word，but was afraid of asking any more questions，in case 'chapel'meant something evil．After considering carefully for a moment，she said，'Well，Master Marner，it's never too late to start going to church．It's very pleasant listening to the singing and the good words．If we go to church，rhen when trouble comes，Someone will take care of us．And if we do our best，then I believe Someone will help us when we need help．'
　　Dolly's explanation of her simple religion did not seem at all clear to Silas，but he did understand that she was asking him to go to church．He did not want to agree to that．Just then young Aaron came out from behind his mother's chair，and Silas of-fered him one of Dolly's cakes．
　　'Oh Aaron！'said his mother．'You're always eating！No，don't give him any more，Master Marner．But he can sing a song for you．I'm sure you'll like it．It's a beautiful Christmas carol．Come，Aaron，let's hear it．'
　　Little Aaron stood up straight and sang his carol in a clear，sweet voice．Dolly listened with delight，hoping that the carol would help to persuade Silas to come to church．
　　'You see，Master Marner，'she said when Aaron had fin－ished，'that's Christmas music．The Christmas Day service is wonderful，with all the voices and the music．I hope you'll be there with us．And remember，if you feel ill，I'll be happy to come and cook or clean for you．But I beg you，please stop weaving on Sundays．It's bad for soul and body，I'm sure．We must go now．Goodbye，Master Marner．'
　　'Thank you，and goodbye，'said Silas，as he opened the door for them．He could not help feeling relieved when she had gone．Now he could weave and moan as much as he liked．
　　Mr Macey and Dolly had tried hard to persuade Silas to go to church．But in the end he spent Christmas Day alone in his cot－tage，looking out at the cold grey sky．In the evening，snow be－gan to fall，and he felt more distant and separate from his neighbours than ever．He sat in his robbed home，moaning mis－erably to himself，not noticing that his fire was no longer burn－ing and that he was getting cold．
　　But in Raveloe the church bells were ringing and the church was fuller than all through the rest of the year．It was a special day for everybody，and after the service they all hurried home in the biting cold to eat and drink with their families．
　　At the Red House nobody spoke of Dunstan's absence．The village doctor，Dr Kimble，and his wife were guests there for Christmas lunch，and the day passed happily．
　　The servants，however，were already preparing for the New Year's Eve dance which Squire Cass gave every year．It was the best party of the year，and guests used to come from miles around．Godfrey was looking forward to this year's party more than usual．But he was still worried．
　　'What if Dunstan returns？'he thought．'He'll tell the Squire about my secret marriage！And Molly's asking for more money！I'll have to sell something for cash．But on New Year's Eve，I can forget everything for an evening，and sit with Nancy，and look into her eyes，and dance with her…'






■ 6 The New Year's Eve dance
　　On December 3lst it was snowing and very cold．All day there were ladies and gentlemen arriving at the Red House．
　　Godfrey Cass was waiting at the door for the only guest he cared about，Nancy Lammeter．Finally she arrived，sitting be hind her father on his horse，looking more beautiful than ever．Her lovely face blushed as she saw Godfrey come forward to lift her down from the horse．'Why is he waiting for me？'she thought．'I thought I made it clear to him that I'll never mar－ry him．People say he leads a bad life，and I can't marry a man like that．'
　　But the Squire appeared just then， to welcome his guests，and in the excitement nobody noticed Nancy's pink face as Godfrey's strong arms lifted her down．She hurried into the house with the other ladies to change her clothes．
　　The house was full of servants running here and there．Mrs Kimble，who always helped the Squire arrange these parties，was giving orders in a loud voice．Cooks were preparing food in the kitchens，and there was already a wonderful smell of baking in the air．
　　Upstairs，the ladies were excitedly putting on their best dresses，while talking to each other all the time．Nancy met her aunt，Mrs Osgood，who introduced her to some visitors of hers．The Misses Gunn were two young ladies who were not beauti－ful，but dressed very fashionably．
　　Just then Nancy's older sister Priscilla arrived．She was a large，cheerful girl，with a round face and a nose pink with cold．As they were changing their clothes，Priscilla said to Mrs Osgood，'Look at our dresses，aunt！Of course Nancy looks beautiful in hers，but this colour makes me look yellow！ Nan－cy says we must wear the same dresses，because we're sisters，although I'm five years older！I'm ugly，I know I am．But I don't mind！'she turned to Mrs Osgood's two visitors．'In my opinion the pretty girls are useful－I'm sure you agree－to catch the men．I don't think men are worth worrying about．Any woman with a good father and a good home had better stay single．That's what I'm going to do，anyway．We ugly girls don't need husbands！'
　　Mrs Osgood stood up and said quickly，'My visitors and I should go downstairs now．Priscilla and Nancy，we'll see you later．'And the three ladies hurried out．
　　'Oh really，Priscilla！'cried Nancy，when they were alone．'You never think before you speak！ I'm sure the Misses Gunn thought you were very impolite！You almost told them they were ugly！'
　　'Did I？'asked Priscilla in surprise．'Well，that's the way I am．I always tell the truth．But I'm the ugly one—just look at me！'
　　'Priscilla，you know I asked you to choose the dresses，'replied Nancy worriedly．'I don't mind what colour I wear．'
　　'You look lovely in this colour，dear child！You know you always have whatever you want in the end，although you never give orders or shout about it．I'm looking forward to seeing you married．It'll be fun watching you make your husband do exactly what you want．'
　　'Don't say that，'answered Nancy， blushing． 'You know I'm never going to get married．'
　　Priscilla laughed．'I'm the one who'll stay single．And if you don't like Godfrey Cass，well，there are plenty of other young men．Come，let's go downstairs now．'
　　Although Priscilla was right in saying she was not good-looking，she was very popular among her neighbours because she was so cheerful and sensible．And Nancy was not only con－sidered to be the most beautiful girl in and around Raveloe，but also one of the most intelligent．
　　Seats at the dining－table had been kept for the Lammeter sisters．Priscilla was taken to sit between her father and the Squire．Nancy felt herself blushing again as Godfrey Cass came to lead her to a seat between himself and the vicar，Mr Crack－enthorp She knew that if she married Godfrey，she would one day be the most important woman in Raveloe，the Squire's wife But she repeated firmly to herself that she could not mar－ry a man of bad character．
　　As she sat down，the vicar，who was always polite to ladies，said with a smile，'Ah，Miss Nancy，you're looking lovely this evening．Isn't she，Go dfrey？'
　　Godfrey made no reply，and avoided looking at Nancy． There was too much he wanted to say to her．But the Squire， who al－ways enjoyed his parties and was feeling extremely cheerful，was rather impatient with his son．He thought he had better speak，if Godfrey was too shy to do it himself．
　　'That's right，'the Squire said loudly．'When I look at Miss Nancy here，I think she's more beautiful than any girl I've ev-er seen．'
　　While they were eating and drinking，people around the table were listening with interest to the Squire's words．' Per－haps Godfrey will marry Nancy after all！'the vicar's wife whispered to Mrs Osgood．Mr Lammeter's back was very straight as he looked across the table at his daughter．He was a serious，careful gentleman，who considered the Lammeters a better family than the Casses．He had already decided that Godfrey must change his way of life before Nancy could possi-bly marry him．
　　Just then Dr Kimble called across the table，'Miss Nancy，will you save a dance for me？'
　　'Come，come，Kimble，'said the Squire，'let the young ones enjoy themselves．My son Godfrey'll be angry if you take Miss Nancy away．I expect he's asked her for the first dance already．Haven't you，Godfrey？'
　　Godfrey was feeling very uncomfortable by now．Turning to Nancy，he said as lightly as possible，'I haven't asked her yet，but I hope she'll agree，if nobody's asked her…'
　　'No，I haven't accapted anyone else，'replied Nancy quietly with a blush．
　　'So will you please have the first dance with me？'asked Godfrey，beginning to feel better．She had not refused him！
　　'I will，'answered Nancy coldly．She was still sure she would not marry him，but she wanted to remain polite．
　　'Ah well，you're a lucky man，Godfrey，'said Dr Kimble with a laugh．'I think I can hear the music starting now！'
　　The guests got up from the table in pairs and small groups，to move into the large hall，where the dancing was about to start．The small village band was already playing，as the Squire led the vicar's wife to the end of the hall to start the dance．They were followed by Godfrey and Nancy，and the other ladies and gentlemen．
　　As the dance went on，Godfrey felt happier and happier．Holding Nancy in his arms，he forgot all his problems．Sudden－ly the Squire's heavy foot stood on part of Nancy's dress，and some of the material was pulled away at the waist．Nancy asked Godfrey to take her to a quieter place，where she could repair the damage．He took her to a small room near the hall，hoping they would have a few private moments together． But Nancy sat down on the chair furthest away from him， and said coldly，'Thank you，sir．You needn't stay． I'm very sorry about taking you away from the dance．'
　　'It's not very kind of you，'said Godfrey，moving close to her，'to be sorry you've danced with me．'
　　'I didn't mean that'replied Nancy，blushing prettily．'Gentlemen have so many things to enjoy．I'm sure one dance can't matter very much．'
　　'You know that isn't true．You know one dance with you means more to me than anything else in the world．'
　　Nancy was a little surprised．Godfrey had not said anything like this to her for a long time．She replied firmly，'I'm afraid I can't believe you，Mr Godrey．'
　　'Nancy，if I changed my life，would you think better of me？Would you—like me，then？'Godfrey knew these were danger－ous words，but the sudden chance of speaking to her alone made him say more than he had planned．
　　'I'd be glad to see a good change in anybody，sir．'
　　'You're very hard，Nancy，'said Godfrey bitterly．'You could help me to be better．I'm very miserable—but you don't feel anything．'
　　'I think people who behave badly don't feel anything，'said Nancy sharply，forgetting to be cool and distant．
　　Godfrey was delighted．He wanted to make her argue with him，to show him that she cared about him．But just then Priscilla hurried in，saying，'Dear child，let me look at your dress！I saw the Squire step on it during the dance．'
　　'I suppose I'd better go now，'Godfrey said disappointedly to Priscilla．
　　'It doesn't matter at all to me whether you go or stay，'said Priscilla impatiently，looking closely at the waist of Nancy's dress．
　　'Do you want me to go？'Godfrey asked Nancy．
　　'Do whatever you like，'replied Nancy， trying to sound cold again．
　　'Well，I want to stay，'answered Godfrey，and sat down．Tonight he wanted to enjoy being with Nancy for as long as possible，without thinking about what would happen tomorrow．






■ 7 Silas finds his'gold'
　　But while Godfrey Cass was managing to forget his prob-lems by the lovely Nancy's side，his wife was walking with slow，uncertain steps along the snow－coverea road to Ray－eloe．She was carrying her sleeping child in her arms．
　　For some time now she had planned to come to Raveloe on New Year's Eve．She knew that her husband would be at the centre of a happy，smiling group of friends，and she had chosen this moment to appear in front of all his family and guests at the Red House dance．'I don't care if Godfrey is ashamed of mes！'she thought bitterly．'I want people to know we're mar－ried！'sometimes she hated her husband， because he was still handsome，and had money，while she was no longer pretty，and very poor．She blamed him for her miserable life，but in her heart she knew she should blame her drinking．It had become a habit wiht her to spend most of the money Godfrey gave her on gin．She had a bottle in her pocket now，which she had lifted to her lips several times during her journey．
　　It was already seven o'clock in the evening，and there was a freezing wind．Molly did not know she was very near Raveloe．Her legs were tired and the gin was beginning to make her feel sleepy．She thought she would rest for a while，and，still hold－ing her child，she lay down on the snow．She did not notice that the ground was cold． In a few moments the child woke up，crying，'Mummy！'But the mother did not seem to hear．Suddenly，as the child fell gently out of its mother's arms on to the soft snow，it noticed a bright，dancing light on the white ground．Interested，the child stood up to see where the brightness came from，and followed the light to an open door，the door of Silas Marner's cottage．The little one toddled right in through the door and sat down by the bright fire．After a few minutes the child felt pleasantly warm， and fell asleep．
　　But where was Silas while this was happening？In the evenings he sometimes used to open his door and look out．He had some idea that his money would come back，or that some-one would come with information about the thief Tonight was New Year's Eve，and the villagers had told him to stay awake until midnight，because it would bring him good luck if he saw the beginning of the new year．So tonight he was more restless than usual．He opened his door several times during the evening，and stared out，but he saw and heard nothing in the silent，freezing night．The last time，as he was standing at the door，he had one of his fits，and stood there completely uncon-scions，holding the door open． When he became conscious again，he closed the door and turned back to the fire．But when his shortsighted eyes looked at the floor in front of the fire，he seemed to see gold there！Gold—his own gold—taken and then brought back to him in the same strange way！His heart beat excitedly，and for a few moments he was unable to move．At last he reached out his hand to touch the gold，but instead of hard，metal coins his fin－gers felt soft，warm curls．
　　With great surprise Silas fell on his knees to look at this wonderful thing．It was a sleeping child．Was he dreaming？Could it be his little sister，who had died when he was a child himself？If it wasn't a dream，how had the child entered the cottage？But thinking of his sister made him remember the past，and his life at the Light Street chapel．He wondered if this child was some kind of message from his past，sent perhaps by the God he had once trusted．
　　Just then the child woke up，and began to cry．Silas held it in his arms，and spoke softly to quieten it．He remembered that he had made some porridge earlier，and gave a little to the child to eat．She stopped crying，and lifted her blue eyes with a smile to Silas's face as she ate．But then she pulled at her wet shoes，trying to take them off，and Silas suddenly realized she had come to the cottage through the snow．So he picked her up and went to the door．As he opened it and went out into the dark，the child cried'Mummy！'and reached forward，almost jump-ing out of his arms．A few steps away，Silas found a young woman's body，half-covered with snow．
　　At the Red House，everybody was enjoying the party．Some people were still eating，while others were dancing or playing cards．Godfrey was looking forward to his next dance with Nancy．He was watching her dreamily across the room，when suddenly he saw something that made his lips go white and his whole body tremble． It was his own child，carried in Silas Marner's arms．The weaver had come straight into the hall，where the dancing was going on．
　　Several people turned to look at the strange figure in the doorway．The Squire could not understand why Sllas had come in uninvited． He stood up and asked angrily，'Marner， what are you doing here？'
　　'I've come for the doctor，'replied Silas hurriedly．' There's a woman－dead，I think－near my cottage．'
　　Godfrey had one great fear at that moment，that the woman was not dead．If she were his wife，and she were dead，he would be free to marry Nancy！
　　While the Squire was calling for Dr Kimble，the ladies came closer to look at the pretty child．
　　'Whose child is it？'one of them asked．
　　'I don't know，'replied Godfrey wildly．'Some poor woman's－she's been found in the snow，I think．'
　　'You'd better leave the poor child here with us then，Master Marner，'offered Mrs Kimble kindly．
　　'No－I can't let it go，'said Silas unexpectedly．'It's come to me—I don't know where from—I want to keep it！''Well！'said Mrs Kimble，surprised．'A single man like you！Take care of a child！Well！'But the little one was holding on to Silas，and smiling up at him confidently．
　　Dr Kimble hurried into the hall．'Where is this poor woman？Near the old quarry？Someone had better fetch Dolly Winthrop．I'll need her to help me．
　　'I'll go！'cried Godfrey．He wanted to get away，before any one noticed his white face and shaking hands， and he needed time to think． He ran out into the night．
　　When he and Dolly arrived at the quarry，the doctor had moved the woman into Silas's cottage，and Godfrey had to wait outside．He walked up and down in the snow，for what seemed like hours． He knew he should tell the truth about the woman and the child，but he could not make himself do what he knew was right．'Is she dead？'the voice inside his head asked．'If she is，I can marry Nancy．And then I'll be good，and have no more secrets．And I'll make sure the child is taken care of，of course．
　　When Dr Kimble came out of the cottage，Godfrey tried to speak calmly．'I thought I'd wait to see…'he began．
　　'Oh，there was no need for you to come．Why didn't you send one of the men to fetch Dolly？The woman's dead， I'm afraid．She's very thin，and looks very poor．But she's got a wedding ring on．She'll be buried tomorrow．
　　'I'll just have a look at her，'said Godfrey quickly．' I think I saw a woman on the road yesterday with a child．Perhaps it was her．'And he ran into the cottage．
　　There on the bed was his unloved wife．He only looked at her for a moment， but for the rest of his life he never forgot her sad，tired face．
　　The weaver had come back with the doctor，and was sitting by the fire，with the child on his knees．The little one was awake，but her wide open blue eyes looked up into Godfrey's face without recognizing him at all．The father was glad of this，but also a little sad，especially when he saw the small hand pull lovingly at the weaver's grey hair．
　　'So，who's going to take care of the child？'Godfrey asked，pretending not to show much interest．
　　'I am，'replied Silas firmly．'The mother's dead，and I sup-pose the child hasn't got a father． She's alone in the world，and so am I．My money's gone，I don't know where，and she's come，I don't know where from．I don't understand it at all，but I'm going to keep her．'
　　'Poor little thing！'said Godfrey．'Let me give you some-thing for her clothes．'He put his hand in his pocket and gave Silas some coins．
　　As he walked back to the Red House，he felt very relieved．Nobody would recognize his dead wife，and soon his secret would be buried with her．Now he could talk of love to Nancy．He could promise to be a good husband to her．Only Dunstan knew about the secret marriage，and perhaps Dunstan would never come home．'What a good thing I didn't confess every－thing to the Squire！'he thought．'Now I can make Nancy and myself happy And the child？Well，it won't matter to her whether I'm her father or not．
　　That week the dead woman was buried in Raveloe，and the child stayed at the weaver's cottage．The villagers were very surprised that Silas had decided to keep her，but they liked him for wanting to help an orphan．The women，especially，were very ready to give him useful advice on taking care of children．
　　Dolly Winthrop came every day to help Silas．'It's no trou－ble，'she said．'I get up early，so I've got plenty of time．And I can bring you some of Aaron's old baby clothes，so you won't need to spend a lot of money on the child．I can wash her，and give her food，and—'
　　'Ye—es，'said silas，hesitating．He was looking a little jeal－ously at the baby in Dolly's arms．'That's very kind of you．But—but I want to do everything for her myself！I want her to be fond of me！She's my child！'
　　'Don't worry，'said Dolly gently，giving him the child．'Look，she loves you the best．See，she's smiling at you！And so Silas learnt how to take care of the little girl．He called her Eppie，which had been his little sister's name．His life was quite different now．When he was working and living only for his gold，he had not been interested in the world outside his cottage，or the people he sometimes met．But now that he had another reason for living，he had to look outward．He spent hours in the fields with Eppie，happily rediscovering the plants he used to know so well．Together they visited his neighbours，who were always delighted to see him and his adopted child．His days and evenings were full，taking care of a trusting，lov-ing child．
　　Godfrey Cass watched the little girl growing up with great interest During Eppie's childhood he often gave money to Silas to spend on her，but was careful that nobody should suspect him of being her father．His life was also changing．There was a new firmness about him which everyone noticed He was looking forward to marrying Nancy very soon．'Nancy and I will have children！'he thought happily．'But I won't forget that other child！'






■ 8 Eppie has grown up
　　It was a bright autumn Sunday，sixteen years after Silas had found Eppie in his cottage．The Raveloe church bells were ringing，and people were coming out of church after the morning service．First came the new squire，Godfrey Cass，looking a little heavier now，but with a straight back and a firm step．On his arm was his wife Nancy，still a pretty woman．Just behind them came Mr Lammeter and Priscilla．They all went into the Red House．
　　'You and Priscilla will stay for tea，won't you？Nancy asked her father．
　　'My dear，you must ask Priscilla，'replied Mr Lammeter with a smile．'She manages me and the farm as well．'
　　'Well，it's better for your health if I manage everything，fa ther，'said Priscilla．'Then there's nothing for you to worry about．No，Nancy dear，we must go home now． But you and I can have a walk round the garden while the servants are get ting the horses ready．
　　When the sisters were alone in the garden，Priscilla said，'My dear，I'm very glad you're going to have a dairy．Making your own butter will give you something to think about all the time．You'll never be sad when you've got a dairy．'And she put her arm through her sister's．
　　'Dear Priscilla，'said Nancy gratefully．'I'm only ever sad when Godfrey is．I could be happy if he could accept our life as it is．But it's more difficult for a man ．'
　　'Men！'cried Priscilla impatiently．'They're always wanting something new！Never happy with what they've got！I'm glad I was too ugly to get married！I'm much happier with fa－ther！'
　　' Oh Priscilla，'said Nancy．'Don't be angry with Godfrey—he's a very good husband． But of course he's disappointed that we haven't had children—he wanted them so much．'
　　'Well，father is waiting for me—I'd better go now．Goodbye，my dear．'And the sisters kissed goodbye When Priscilla and her father had left，Godfrey said，'Nancy，I think I'll just go and look at some of the fields we're draining near the old quarry ．'
　　'You'll be back by tea-time，dear？'
　　'Oh yes，I'll be back in an hour．'
　　This was a habit of Godfrey's on Sunday afternoons．He en－joyed walking round the fields that belonged to him now．So Nancy often had a quiet hour at about this time，which she spent reading，or sometimes just thinking.
　　She remembered all the little things that had happened to her，especially during her marriage，in the last fifteen years ．The great sadness of her married life had been the death of her only baby．Like most women，she had looked forward to be－coming a mother very much．But when the baby died soon af－ter it was born，she made herself accept the fact． She did not allow herself to think about it，or to wish for anything different．Godfrey，however，had been terribly disappointed，es－pecially when it seemed likely that Nancy could have no more children．
　　Nancy's religion was extremely important to her．She firmly believed that people should accept whatever happened to them in life，because it was God who decided everything．But she un-derstood how difficult it was for Godfrey to accept that their marriage would be childless．'Was I right，'she wondered for the hundredth time，'to refuse him，when he said we should adopt a child？I believe that if God hasn't given us a child，it's because God doesn't want us to have one．I'm sure I'm right．But poor Godfrey！It's worse for him than for me．I've got him， and the house，and now the dairy to think about． But although he's always good to me，I know he's unhappy—he wants children so much！'
　　From the first moment Godfrey had spoken of adopting a child，he had mentioned Eppie's name．She had always been the child he wanted to adopt．He had no idea that Silas would rather die than lose Eppie，and he imagined that the weaver would be glad if the child were adopted by the Cass family．'After all，the girl will have a much better life with us，'he told himself．'I can't be really happy if we don't have a child．And I can never tell Nancy the truth about Eppie—I'm afraid she'll hate me for it．'
　　While Nancy was sitting quietly in the Red House，thinking about her husband，Silas and Eppie were sitting outside their cottage near the quarry They had been to church too，which they did every week，like the Casses and most of the villagers Silas had started taking Eppie to church when she was very young，because Dolly Winthrop had persuaded him that every child should have some religious training．Because of Eppie，Silas was completely accepted in Raveloe now．Nobody thought he was strange any more；in fact，he was almost a popular fig-ure in the village．
　　He was older now，and could not work as hard as he used to．Recently，as he had more time to think，he had begun to re-member the past，and his old friends at the Light Street chapel．He realized how his once lonely life had changed since Eppie had come to him Now he had friends，and trusted people，and was happy． And he began to see that the God in the Raveloe church was the same God he had been so angry with，the last time he had been to the chapel．It seemed to him that there had been some mistake in his past，which had thrown a dark shadow over his early life Perhaps now he would never know whether Mr Paston，the chapel minister，still thought he was guilty of stealing．And he would never dis－cover why the drawing of the lots had seemed to prove his guilt．'But there must be a Good of goodness in this world，'he thought，'because He sent Eppie to me．I must just trust，and believe that He is right.'
　　He had told Eppie how her mother had died in the snow，and he had given her the dead woman's wedding ring．Eppie was not at all interested in who her real father was，as she thought she had the best father in the world already．At the moment she was sitting close to Silas outside their door in the sunshine．Neither of them had spoken for a while．
　　'Father，'she said gently，'if I get married，do you think I should wear my mother's ring？'
　　'Oh，Eppie！'said Silas，surprised．'Are you thinking of get－ting married，then？'
　　'Well，Aaron was talking to me about it，'replied Eppie，blushing．'You know he's nearly twenty-four now，and is earning good money， and he'd like to marry soon．'
　　'And who would he like to marry？'asked Silas with rather a sad smile．
　　'Why，me，of course，daddy！'said Eppie，laughing and kiss－ing her father．'He won't want to marry anyone else！'
　　'And you'd like to marry him，would you？'asked Silas．
　　'Yes，one day．I don't know when．Aaron says everyone's married some time．But I told him that's not true，because you haven't ever been married，have you，daddy？'
　　'No，child，'said Silas．'I was a lonely man before you were sent to me．'
　　'But you'll never be lonely again，father，'said Eppie loving－ly．'That's what Aaron said．He doesn't want to take me away from you．He wants us all to live together，and he'll do all the work，and you needn't work at all，father．He'll be like a son to you．'
　　'Well，my child，you're young to be married，'said Silas．'But he's a good young man．We'll ask his mother what we should do．She always gives us good advice．You see，Eppie，I'm getting older，and I'd like to think of you with a strong young husband to take care of you for the rest of your life．Yes，we'll ask Dolly Winthrop for her opinion．'






■ 9 Godfrey confesses at last
　　At the Red House Nancy was waiting patiently for God－frey to come home to tea．Suddenly one of the servants ran into the sitting-room，crying excitedly，'Madam，there are lots of people in the street！They're all running the same way，towards the quarry！Perhaps there's been an accident！'
　　'Jane，don't get so excited，'replied Nancy calmly．'I ex-pect it's nothing serious．Go and get the tea ready．Mr Godfrey will be back soon．'But secretly she was saying to herself，'I hope nothing's happened to Godfrey！'
　　So when he came into the room，a few minutes later，she was very relieved．'My dear，I'm so thankful you've come，'she said，going towards him．'I was beginning to think—'
　　She stopped suddenly when she saw Godfrey's shaking hands and white face．She put her hand on his arm，but he did not seem to notice，and threw himself into a chair．
　　'Sit down—Nancy，'he said with difficulty．'I came back as soon as I could，to prevent anyone telling you except me． It's terrible news for me， but I'm more worried about how you will feel about it．'
　　'It isn't father or Priscilla？'said Nancy，trying to control her trembling lips．
　　'No，it's nobody living，'said Godfrey．'It's Dunstan，my brother，who left home sixteen years ago and never came back．We've found him…found his body—all that's left of it—in the old quarry．
　　Nancy felt calmer now．That was not terrible news．
　　'You know the men have been draining our fields near the quarry．Well，as a result， the quarry has suddenly gone dry，and we've found him lying at the bottom． We know it's him be－cause he's wearing his watch and his rings．'
　　Godfrey paused．It was not easy to say what came next．
　　'Do you think he drowned himself？'asked Nancy，wonder－ing why her husband was so shaken by the death of a brother he had never loved．
　　'No，he fell in，'replied Godfrey in a low voice．'Dunstan was the man who robbed Silas Marner．The bags of gold were found with his body．'
　　'Oh Godfrey！I am sorry！'said Nancy．She understood how ashamed her husband must be．The Casses were so proud of their family name．
　　'I had to tell you．I couldn't keep it from you，'Godfrey continued，and then stopped，looking at the ground for two long minutes．Nancy knew that he had something more to say．Finally Godfrey lifted his eyes to her face，and said，'Every－body's secrets are discovered sooner or later，Nancy．I've lived with a secret ever since I married you，but I'm going to confess it now．I don't want you to discover it from someone else，or hear about it when I'm dead，I was weak and hesitating when I was younger—I'm going to be firm with myself now．'
　　Nancy could not speak．She stared at her husband in horror．What secret could he possibly have from her？
　　'Nancy，'said Godfrey slowly，'when I married you，I hid something from you—I was wrong not to tell you．That woman Silas Marner found dead in the snow—Eppie's moth er—that poor woman—was my wife．Eppie is my child．'
　　He paused，looking worriedly at Nancy．But she sat quite still，although her face looked rather white．
　　Perhaps you won't be able to love me any more，'he said，his voice trembling a little．
　　She was silent．
　　I was wrong，I know I was wrong to marry Molly and then to keep it a secret．But I loved you，Nancy，I only ever wanted to marry you．
　　Still Nancy was silent，looking down at her hands．And God frey almost expected her to get up and say she would leave him and go to live with her father and sister．She was so religious，and so firm in her ideas of right and wrong！
　　But at last she lifted her eyes to his and spoke．She did not sound angry，but only sad．'Oh Godfrey，why didn't you tell me this long ago？ I didn't know Eppie was yours and so I re fused to adopt her．Of course I'd accept your child into our home！But—oh，Godfrey—how sad to think we've spent all these years with no children！Why didn't you confess the truth before we married？We could be so happy now，with a beautiful daughter，who would love me as her mother！'tears were running down Nancy's face But Nancy，'cried Godfrey，bitterly angry with himself，' I couldn't tell you everything！I was in danger of losing you if I told you the truth！'
　　'I don't know about that，Godfrey．I certainly never want－ed to marry anyone else But it wasn't worth doing wrong just so that you could marry me．And our marriage hasn't been as happy for you as you thought it would be There was a sad smile on Nancy's face as she said the last words．
　　'Can you ever forgive me for what I've done，Nancy？
　　You have only hurt me a little，Godfrey，and you've been a good husband to me for fifteen years But it's the other wom－an who you've hurt the most，and I don't see how you can put that right．'
　　But we can take Eppie into our home now，'said Godfrey．
　　'It'll be different now that she's grown up，'said Nancy，shaking her head sadly．'It'll be more difficult for her to get used to us．But it's our duty to take care of your child，and I'll ask God to make her love me．
　　Then we'll go to the weaver's cottage tonight，'said God－frey，'and talk to Marner and Eppie about it．'






■ 10 Eppie has to decide
　　That evening Silas was resting in his chair near the fire，after the excitement of the day．Eppie was sitting close to him，holding both his hands，and on the table was Silas's lost gold．He had put the coins in piles，as he used to．
　　'You see，that's all I ever did in the long evenings before you came to me，'he was telling Eppie，'just count my gold．I was only half alive in those days．What a good thing the money was taken away from me！I was killing myself with working all day，and counting money half the night．It wasn't a healthy life．And when you came，with your yellow curls，I thought you were the gold，And then，when I began to love you，I didn't want my gold any more．'He stopped talking for a moment and looked at the money．'The gold doesn't mean anything to me now．But perhaps，if I ever lost you，Eppie，if you ever went away from me，I'd need my gold again．I'd feel lonely then，and I'd think God had forgotten me，and perhaps I'd go back to my bad old habits．'there were tears in Eppie's beautiful eyes，but she did not have time to answer Silas，as just then there was a knock on the door．When she opened it，Mr and Mrs Godfrey Cass came in．
　　Good evening，my dear，'said Nancy，taking Eppie's hand gently．'We're sorry to come so late． '
　　'Well，Marner，'said Godfrey，as he and Nancy sat down，'I'm glad you've got your money back，and I'm very sorry it was one of my family who stole it from you． Whatever I can do for you，I will，to repay what I owe you—and I owe you a lot， Marner．'silas was always uncomfortable with important people like the young Squire．'You don't owe me anything，sir．You've already been very kind to me. And that money on the table is more than most working people can save in their whole life．Eppie and I don't need very much．'
　　Godfrey was impatient to explain why they had come．'Yes，you've done well these last sixteen years，Marner，taking care of Eppie here．She looks pretty and healthy，but not very strong. Don't you think she should be a lady，not a working woman？Now Mrs Cass and I，you know；have no children，and we'd like to adopt a daughter to live with us in our beauti-ful home and enjoy all the good things we're used to．In fact，we'd like to have Eppie．I'm sure you'd be glad to see her be－come a lady，and of course we'd make sure you have every thing you need. And Eppie will come to see you very often，I expect．'
　　Godfrey did not find it easy to say what he felt，and as a re－sult his words were not chosen sensitively．Silas was hurt，and afraid．His whole body trembled as he said quietly to Eppie af－ter a moment，'I won't stand in your way，my child．Thank Mr and Mrs Cass．It's very kind of them．'
　　Eppie stepped forward She was blushing，but held her head high．'Thank you，sir and madam．But I can't leave my father．And I don't want to be a lady， thank you．'she went back to Silas's chair，and put an arm round his neck，brushing the tears from her eyes．
　　Godfrey was extremely annoyed He wanted to do what he thought was his duty．And adopting Eppie would make him feel much less guilty about his past But，Eppie，you must agree，'he cried．'You are my daughter！Marner，Eppie's my own child Her mother was my wife.
　　Eppie's face went white． Silas，who had been relieved by hearing Eppie's answer to Godfrey，now felt angry．'Then，sir，'he answered bitterly，'why didn't you confess this sixteen years ago，before I began to love her？Why do you come to take her away now，when it's like taking the heart out of my body？God gave her to me because you turned your back on her！ And He considers her mine！'
　　I know I was wrong，and I'm sorry，'said Godfrey．'But be sensible， Marner！She'll be very near you and will often come to see you．She'll feel just the same towards you．
　　'Just the same？'said Silas more bitterly than ever．'How can she feel the same？We're used to spending all our time to-gether！We need each other！
　　Godfrey thought the weaver was being very selfish．'I think，Marner，'he said firmly，'that you should consider what's best for Eppie．You shouldn't stand in her way，when she could have a better life．I'm sorry，but I think it's my duty to take care of my own daughter．'
　　Silas was silent for a moment．He was worried that perhaps Godfrey was right，and that it was selfish of him to keep Eppie．At last he made himself bring out the difficult words．'All right．I'll say no more．Speak to the child．I won't pre－vent her from going．'
　　Godfrey and Nancy were relieved to hear this，and thought that Eppie would now agree．'Eppie，my dear，'said Godfrey，'althought I haven't been a good father to you so far，I want to do my best for you now．And my wife will be the best of mothers to you．'
　　'I've always wanted a daughter，my dear，'added Nancy in her gentle voice．
　　But Eppie did not come forward this time．She stood by Silas's side，holding his hand in hers，and spoke almost coldly．'Thank you，sir and madam， for your kind offer．But I wouldn't be happy if I left father．He'd have nobody if I weren't here．Nobody shall ever come between him and me！''But you must make sure，Eppie，'said Silas worriedly，' that you won't be sorry，if you decide to stay with poor people．You could have a much better life at the Red House．''I'll never be sorry，father，'said Eppie firmly．'I don't want to be rich，if I can't live with the people I know and love．'
　　Nancy thought she could help to persuade Eppie．'What you say is natural，my dear child，'she said kindly．'But there's a duty you owe to your lawful father．If he opens his home to you，you shouldn't turn your back on him．'
　　'But I can't think of any home except this one！'cried Eppie，tears running down her face．'l've only ever known one father！And I've promised to marry a working man，who'll live with us，and help me take care of father！
　　Godfrey looked at Nancy Let's go，'he said to her bitterly，in a low voice．
　　'We won't talk of this any more，'said Nancy，getting up．We just want the best for you，Eppie my dear，and you too，Marner．Good night．'
　　Nancy and Godfrey left the cottage and walked home in the moonlight．When they reached home，Godfrey dropped into a chair．Nancy stood near him，waiting for him to speak．After a few moments he looked up at her，and took her hand．
　　'That's ended！'he said sadly．
　　She kissed him and then said，'Yes，I'm afraid we can't hope to adopt her，if she doesn't want to come to us．
　　'No，'said Godfrey，'it's too late now．I made mistakes in the past，and I can't put them right．I wanted to be childless once，Nancy，and now I'll always be childless．'
　　He thought for a moment，and then spoke in a softer voice．'But I got yon，Nancy，and yet I've been wanting something different all the time Perhaps from now on I'll be able to ac－cept our life better，and we'll be happier．'The following spring，there was a wedding in Raveloe．The sun shone warmly as Eppie walked through the village towards the church，with Silas，Aaron and Dolly．Eppie was wearing the beautiful white wedding dress she had always dreamed of，which Nancy Cass had bought for her．She was walking arm in arm with her father，Silas．
　　'I promise nothing will change when I'm married，father，'she whispered to him as they entered the church．'You know I'll never leave you．
　　There was quite a crowd of villagers outside the church to see the wedding．Just then Miss Priscilla Lammeter and her fa－ther drove into the village．
　　'Look，father！'cried Priscilla．'How lucky！We're in time to see the weaver's daughter getting married！Doesn't she look lovely？I'm sorry Nancy couldn't find a pretty little or－phan girl like that to take care of．
　　Yes，my dear，'agreed Mr Lammeter．'Now that we're all getting older，it would be good to have a young one in the fam－ily．Unfortunately，it's too late now．
　　They went into the Red House，where Nancy was waiting for them．They had come to spend the day with her，because Godfrey was away on business and she would perhaps be lonely without him．The Casses were not going to Eppie's wedding．
　　When the little wedding group came out of the church，the villagers and Silas's family all went to the Rainbow．There a wonderful wedding lunch was waiting for them，which had been ordered and paid for by Godfrey Cass．
　　'It's very generous of the young Squire to pay for all this，'said the landlord as he refilled the beer glasses． 'Well，what would you expect？'replied old Mr Macey sharply．'Remember，it was his own brother who stole the weaver's gold！And Mr Godfrey has always helped Master Marner，with furniture and clothes and so on，since young Ep-pie came to the cottage．Well，it's only right to help a man like Master Marner．And I'd like you all to remember—I was the first to tell you I thought Master Marner was harmless—and I was right！Now let's drink to the health of the happy young couple！'And the villagers lifted their glasses and cried，' To Eppie and Aaron！'
　　When the meal was over and the guests had begun to return to their homes，Silas，Eppie and her new husband walked slow-ly back to their cottage by the quarry．It had been enlarged by Godfrey Cass's workmen，and was looking lovely in the late af－ternoon sunshine．
　　'Oh father，'said Eppie．'What a pretty home ours is！I think nobody could be happier than we are！ '




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　A Tale of Two Cities by Charles Dickens





■ 1 The road to Paris—1775
　　It was the best of times, it was the worst of times. It was the season of light, it was the season of darkness. It was the spring of hope, it was the winter of sadness. It was the year one thousand seven hundred and seventy－five.
　　In France there was a King and a Queen, and in England there was a King and a Queen. They believed that nothing would ever change. But in France things were bad, and getting worse. The people were poor, hungry and unhappy. The King made paper money and spent it, and the people had nothing to eat. Behind closed doors in the homes of the people, voices spoke in whispers against the King and his noblemen；they were only whispers, but they were the angry whispers of desperate people.
　　Late one November night, in that same year 1775, a coach going from London to Dover, stopped at the top of a long hill. The horses were tired, but as they rested, the driver heard an other horse coming fast up the hill behind them. The rider stopped his horse beside the coach and shouted：
　　'I want a passenger, Mr Jarvis Lorry, from Tellson's Bank in London.'
　　'I am Mr Jarvis Lorry, ' said one of the passengers, putting his head out of the window.'What do you want
'
　　'It's me！Jerry, Jerry Cruncher, from Tellson's Bank, sir, ' cried the man on the horse.
　　'What's the matter, Jerry
' called Mr Lorry.
　　A message for you, Mr Lorry. You've got to wait at Dover for a young lady.'
　　'Very well, Jerry, ' said Mr Lorry.'Tell them my answer is CAME BACK TO LIFE'.
　　It was a strange message, and a stranger answer. No one in the coach understood what they meant.
　　The next day Mr Lorry was sitting in his hotel in Dover when a young lady arrived. She was pretty, with golden hair and blue eyes, and Mr Lorry remembered a small child, almost a baby. He had carried her in his arms when he came from Calais to Dover, from France to England, many years ago. Mr Lorry asked the young lady to sit down.
　　'Miss Manette, ' he said.'I have a strange story to tell you, about one of the customers of Tellson's Bank. That's where I work.'
　　'Yes, but I don't quite understand, Mr Lorry, ' said the young lady.'I received a message from Tellson's Bank, asking me to come here to meet you. I understood there was some news about my poor father's money. He died so long ago—before I was born. What is this story you want to tell me
'
　　'About twenty years ago, Miss Manette, a French doctor married an English lady. They had a daughter, but just before she was born, her father disappeared. Nobody knew what had happened to him. Not long afterwards his unhappy wife died, and their daughter was brought back to England.'
　　'But this is like my father's story, Mr Lorry. And wasn't it you who brought me back to England
'
　　'Yes, that's true, Miss Manette. Many years ago I brought you from France to England, and Tellson's Bank has taken care of you since then. You were told that your father had died. But think, Miss Manette. Perhaps your father wasn't dead. Perhaps he was in prison. Not because he had done something wrong！ But just because he had a powerful enemy—an enemy with the power to send him to prison and to keep him there, hidden and forgotten, for eighteen years！'
　　'Can it be true
 Is it possible that my father is still alive
' Lucie Manette stared at Mr Lorry. Her face was white and her hands trembled.'It will be his ghost—not him！'
　　'No, Miss Manette, ' said Mr Lorry gently.'He is alive, but he has changed very much. Even his name had been forgotten！And we must ask no questions about the past, no questions at all. It would be too dangerous. He has been taken to the house of an old servant in Paris, and we are going there to bring him back to life.'



”
”
”



■ 2 A wine－shop in Paris
　　In the part of Paris called Saint Antoine everyone was poor. The streets were narrow and dirty, the food－shops were almost empty. The faces of the children looked old already, because they were so hungry. In the wine－shop of Monsieur Defarge there were not many customers and Defarge was outside, talking to a man in the street. His wife, Madame Defarge, sat inside the shop, knitting and watching. Defarge came in and his wife looked at him, then turned her eyes to look at two new customers, a man of about sixty and a young lady. Defarge went over to speak to them, suddenly kissed the young lady's hand, and led them out of the back of the shop. They followed him upstairs, many stairs, until they reached the top. Defarge took a key out of his pocket.
　　'Why is the door locked
' asked Mr Lorry in surprise.'He is a free man now.'
　　'Because he has lived too long behind a locked door, ' replied Defarge angrily.'He is afraid if the door is not locked！That is one of the things they have done to him.'
　　'I'm afraid, too, ' whispered Miss Manette. Her blue eyes looked worriedly at Mr Lorry.'I am afraid of him—of my father.'
　　Defarge made a lot of noise as he opened the door. Mr Lorry and Lucie went into the room behind him. A thin, white－haired man was sitting on a wooden seat. He was very busy, making shoes.
　　'Good day, ' said Defarge.'You are still working hard, I see.'
　　After a while they heard a whisper.'Yes, I am still working.'
　　'Come, ' said Defarge.'You have a visitor. Tell him your name.'
　　'My name
' came the whisper.'One Hundred and Five, North Tower.'
　　Mr Lorry moved closer to the old man.'Dr Manette, don't you remember me, Jarvis Lorry
' he asked gently.
　　The old prisoner looked up at Mr Lorry, but there was no surprise, no understanding in his tired face, and he went back to work making shoes.
　　Slowly Lucie came near to the old man. After a while he noticed her.
　　'Who are you
' he asked.
　　Lucie put her arms around the old man and held him, tears of happiness and sadness running down her face. From a little bag the old man took some golden hair. He looked at it, and then he looked at Lucie's hair.'It is the same. How can it be
' He stared into Lucie's face.'No, no, you are too young, too young.'
　　Through her tears Lucie tried to explain that she was the daughter he had never seen. The old man still did not understand, but he seemed to like the sound of Lucie's voice and the touch of her warm young hand on his.
　　Then Lucie said to Mr Lorry, 'I think we should leave Paris at once. Can you arrange it
'
　　'Yes, of course, ' said Mr Lorry.'But do you think he is able to travel
'
　　'He will be better far away from this city where he has lost so much of his life, ' said Lucie.
　　'You are right, ' said Defarge.'And there are many other reasons why Dr Manette should leave France now.'
　　While Mr Lorry and Defarge went to arrange for a coach to take them out of Paris, Lucie sat with her father. Exhausted by the meeting, he fell asleep on the floor, and his daughter watched him quietly and patiently until it was time to go.
　　When Mr Lorry returned, he and Defarge brought food and clothes for Dr Manette. The Doctor did everything they told him to do；he had been used to obeying orders for so many years. As he came down the stairs, Mr Lorry heard him say again and again, 'One Hundred and Five, North Tower.'
　　When they went to the coach, only one person saw them go：Madame Defarge. She stood in the doorway, and knitted and watched, seeing everything… and seeing nothing.



”
”
”



■ 3 A trial in London—1780
　　Tellson's Bank in the City of London was an old, dark, and ugly building. It smelt of dust and old papers, and the people who worked there all seemed old and dusty, too. Outside the building sat Jerry Cruncher, who carried messages for people in the bank.
　　One morning in March 1780, Jerry had to go to the Old Bailey to collect an important message from Mr Lorry. Trials at the Old Bailey were usually for very dangerous criminals, and the prisoner that morning was a young man of about twenty—five, well dressed and quite calm.
　　'What's he done
' Jerry asked the doorman quietly.
　　'He's a spy！A French spy！'the doorman told him.' He travels from England to France and tells the French King secret information about our English army.'
　　'What'll happen if he's guilty
' asked Jerry.
　　'oh, he'll have to die, no question of that, ' replied the doorman enthusiastically.'They'll hang him.'
　　'What's his name
'
　　'Darnay, Charles Darnay. Not an English name, is it
'
　　While Jerry waited, he looked around at the crowd inside the Old Bailey and noticed a young lady of about twenty years, and her father, a gentleman with very white hair. The young lady seemed very sad when she looked at the prisoner, and held herself close to her father.
　　Then the trial began, and the first person who spoke against Charles Darnay was called John Barsad.
　　He was an honest man, he said, and proud to be an Englishman. Yes, he was, or had been, a friend of the prisoner's. And in the prisoner's pockets he had seen important plans and lists about the English armies. No, of course he had not put the lists there himself. And no, he was not a spy himself, he was not someone paid to make traps for innocent people.
　　Next the young lady spoke. She said that she had met the prisoner on the boat which had carried her and her father from France to England.'He was very good and kind to my father and to me, 'she said.
　　'Was he travelling alone on the ship
'
　　'No, he was with two French gentlemen.'
　　'Now, Miss Manette, did you see him show them any papers, or anything that looked like a list
'
　　'No, I didn't see anything like that.'
　　Questions, questions, questions！The trial went on, and finally, a small, red－haired man spoke. He told the judge that he had seen Mr Darnay at a hotel in a town where there were many soldiers and ships. Then one of the lawyers, a man called Sydney Carton, wrote some words on a piece of paper, and gave it to Mr Stryver, the lawyer who was speaking for Mr Darnay.
　　'Are you quite sure that the prisoner is the man you saw
' Mr Stryver asked the red－haired man.
　　'Quite sure, ' said the man.
　　Have you ever seen anyone like the prisoner
' asked Mr Stryver.
　　'I'd always be able to recognize him.' The red－haired man was very confident.
　　'Then I must ask you to look at the gentleman over there, ' said Mr Stryver, pointing to Sydney Carton.'Don't you think that he is very like the prisoner
'
　　Everyone in the court could see that Sydney Carton and Charles Darnay were indeed very similar.
　　'Well then, ' said Mr Stryver, 'it is so easy to find a man like the prisoner that we can even find one in this room. So how can you be so sure that it was the prisoner you saw in that hotel
'
　　And the red－haired man said not another word.
　　The lawyers talked and argued, and when at last the trial came to an end, Jerry Cruncher had fallen asleep.
　　But Mr Lorry woke him up and gave him a piece of paper. 'NOT GUILTY' were the words written on it, and Jerry hurried back to Tellson's Bank with the message.
　　Sydney Carton seemed to be a man who did not care about anyone or anything. He was Mr Stryver's assistant. In fact, he did most of the real work for Mr Stryver. Stryver was good at speaking at a trial, but he was not good at discovering important facts and details, especially when these details were hidden in a lot of papers. Every night Carton studied the many papers that lawyers have to read, and he wrote down the questions which Stryver should ask at the next day's trial. And every day Stryver asked these questions, and people thought how clever he was.
　　Outside the Old Bailey Mr Darnay, now a free man, met his friends： Dr Manette and his daughter Lucie, Mr Jarvis Lorry, Mr Stryver, and Mr Carton.
　　Dr Manette no longer looked like the man in the room above Defarge's wine－shop five years ago. His hair was white, but his eyes were bright and he stood straight and strong. Sometimes his face became dark and sad when he remembered the years in the Bastille prison；at these times only his daughter Lucie, whom he loved so much, could help him.
　　As they stood there talking, a strange expression came over Dr Manette's face. He was staring at Charles Darnay, but he did not seem to see him. For a few moments there was dislike, even fear in his eyes.'My father, ' said Lucie softly, putting her hand on his arm, 'shall we go home now
'
　　'Yes, ' he answered slowly.
　　Soon they drove off in a coach, and then Mr Stryver and Mr Lorry walked away, leaving Mr Darnay and Mr Carton alone.
　　'It must be strange for you, ' said Carton, 'to be a free man again, and to be standing here, talking to a man who looks just like you. Let us go out and eat together.'
　　After they had eaten, Carton said softly, 'How sad and worried Miss Manette was for you today！ She's a very beautiful young woman, don't you think
'
　　Darnay did not reply to what Carton had said, but he thanked him for his help at the trial.
　　'I don't want your thanks, ' replied Carton.'I have done nothing. And I don't think I like you.'
　　'Well, ' said Darnay, 'you have no reason to like me. But I hope that you will allow me to pay the bill for both of us.'
　　'Of course. And as you are paying for me, I'll have another bottle of wine.'
　　After Darnay had left, Carton drank some more wine and looked at himself in the mirror. He was angry because Darnay looked so much like him, but was so different. Carton knew that he was a clever lawyer, and that he was a good and honest man, but he had never been successful for himself. He drank too much, and his life was unhappy and friendless. His cleverness and his hard work in the law only made others, like Mr Stryver, successful and rich. He remembered Lucie Manette's worried face when she watched Darnay in court.
　　'If I changed places with Darnay, ' he whispered to himself, 'would those blue eyes of Miss Manette look at me, in the same way
 No, no, it's too late now.'
　　He drank another bottle of wine and fell asleep.
　　In a quiet street not far away was the house where Dr Manette and Lucie lived. They had one servant, Miss Pross, who had taken care of Lucie since she was a child. Miss Pross had red hair and a quick, sharp voice, and seemed at first sight a very alarming person. But everybody knew that she was in fact a warm－hearted and unselfish friend, who would do anything to guard her darling Lucie from trouble or danger.
　　Dr Manette was now well enough to work as a doctor, and he, Lucie, and Miss Pross led a quiet, comfortable life. Mr Lorry, who had become a close family friend, came regularly to the house, and in the months after the trial, Mr Darnay and Mr Carton were also frequent visitors. This did not please Miss Pross at all, who always looked very cross when they came.
　　'Nobody is good enough for my darling Lucie, ' she told Mr Lorry one day, 'and I don't like all these hundreds of visitors.'
　　Mr Lorry had a very high opinion of Miss Pross, but he wasn't brave enough to argue that two visitors were not'hundreds'. Nobody argued with Miss Pross if they could avoid it.



”
”
”
”
”
”
”
”



■ 4 The Marquis of Evremonde
　　The Marquis of Evremonde was a disappointed man. He had waited for hours at the palace of the King of France, but the King had not spoken to him. Angrily, the Marquis got into his coach and told the driver to take him home. Very soon the coach was driving fast out of Paris, and the people in the narrow streets had to run to get out of the way—if they could. At the corner of a street in Saint Antoine, one of the coach wheels hit something, and the people in the street screamed loudly. The horses were frightened and stopped.
　　'What has gone wrong
' asked the Marquis calmly, looking out of the window of the coach. A tall man had picked something up from under the feet of the horses and was crying loudly over it.
　　'Why is that man making that terrible noise
' asked the Marquis impatiently.
　　'I'm sorry, Monsieur the Marquis. It is his child, ' said one of the people.
　　'Dead！Killea！'screamed the man.
　　The people in the street came close to the coach and looked to the coach and looked at the Marquis with stony, silent faces. The Marquis looked back at them in bored dislike. To him, they were no more than animals.
　　'I can't understand, ' he said coldly, 'why you people cannot take care of yourselves and your children. I hope my horses are not hurt.' And he threw a gold coin to his driver.'Give this to that man！'
　　'Dead！'shouted the father of the child again.
　　Another man came forward.'Be brave, Gaspard. Your child has died quickly, and without pain. It is better to die like that than to go on living in these terrible times.'
　　'You are a sensible man, ' said the Marquis from his coach.
　　'What is your name
'
　　'They call me Defarge.'
　　'This is for you, ' said the Marquis, and he threw Defarge another gold coin.'Drive on, ' he called to his driver.
　　Just as the coach was leaving, a coin was thrown back in through the window. The Marquis looked angrily at the corner where Defarge had been standing. Defarge had gone. At the corner there now stood a large, dark－haired woman, knitting. She stared long and hard at the face of the Marquis, but he did not look at her, and drove on.
　　Later that day, as the sun was going down, the same coach stopped in a village near the Marquis's castle. Several villagers, in poor thin clothes, with thin hungry faces, were standing in the village square. The Marquis looked at their faces and then pointed to one of them.
　　'Bring that man to me, ' he said to his driver.
　　The man came up to the coach, hat in hand, and the other villagers moved closer to listen.
　　'I passed you on the road just outside the village, ' said the Marquis.'You were looking at my coach in a very strange way. Why was that
'
　　'Monsieur, I was looking at the man, ' came the reply.
　　'What man
' asked the Marquis angrily.
　　'The man who was holding on under your coach, ' said the poor man, trembling with fear.
　　'What was he like
'
　　'Oh, Monsieur, he was white from head to foot. All covered with dust. Just like a ghost.'
　　'Where is he now
 What happened to him
'
　　'Oh, he ran away down the hill outside the village.'
　　The Marquis turned to speak to another man. This was Monsieur Gabelle, the Marquis's official in the village.
　　'Gabelle, ' the Marquis said, 'watch out for this man. If he comes here, put him in prison.'
　　When the Marquis arrived at his castle, he asked if his nephew, Monsieur Charles, had arrived from England.
　　'Not yet, sir, ' replied the servant, but as the Marquis was eating his dinner, he heard the sound of a coach outside. Soon his nephew entered the room. In England he was known as Charles Darnay.
　　'You've been away for a long time, ' said the Marquis, with his cold, polite smile.
　　'I've had many problems in England. Perhaps because of you, ' Darnay said to his uncle.'I was in great danger.'
　　'No, no, I had nothing to do with your problems, ' replied the Marquis coldly.'Unfortunately, our family no longer has the power that it once had.'
　　'If it still had that power, one word from you would doubtless send me to prison, ' said Darnay.
　　'Possibly. For the good of our family.'
　　'The name of our family is hated everywhere in France. We are hard, cruel landowners. Our miserable people own nothing. They work for us night and day, but they don't even have enough food for themselves and their children. If this land became mine, I would give it away, and go and live somewhere else.'
　　'You seem to be very fond of England, although you are not a rich man there, ' said the Marquis.'I believe you know another Frenchman who has found a safe home there. A Doctor, I believe
'
　　'Yes.'
　　'With a daughter
'
　　'Yes.'
　　'Yes, ' said the Marquis with a secret smile on his face. 'So, a new way of life begins. But you are tired. Goodnight, Charles sleep well. I shall see you in the morning.'
　　After his nephew had gone to bed, the Marquis went to his room. The castle was surrounded with darkness. In the villages nearby the hungry people dreamt of a better life, with enough good food to eat, and time to rest from their work.
　　Early in the morning the dreamers awoke and started their day's hard work. The people in the castle did not get up until later, but when they did, why did the great bell start ringing
 Why did people ride out of the castle to the village as fast as they could

　　The answer lay in the bed of the Marquis. He lay there, like stone, with a knife pushed into his heart. On his chest lay a piece of paper with the words：
　　'Drive him fast to his grave. This is from JACQUES.'



”
”
”
”
”
”




■ 5 Two men speak of love
　　Twelve months after the death of the Marquis in France, Charles Darnay had become a successful teacher of French in London. He had known, when he came to London, that he would have to work hard to earn his living, and he was successful. He was also in love. He had loved Lucie Manette from the time when his life was in danger in the Old Bailey. He had never heard a sound so sweet as her gentle voice；he had never seen a face so beautiful as hers. But he had never spoken to her about his love. The death of his uncle in France had become, over the twelve months, like a dream to him, but he had said nothing to Lucie of his feelings, nor of what had happened. He had good reason for this.
　　But one day in the summer he came to Dr Manette's home in London. He knew that Lucie was out with Miss Pross, and he had decided to speak to her father. Dr Manette was now strong in body and mind, and sad memories of his long years in prison did not come back to him often. When Darnay arrived, the Doctor welcomed him warmly.
　　'Dr Manette, ' said Darnay, 'I know that Lucie is out. But I have come here today to speak to you.'
　　There was a silence.'Do you want to speak to me about Lucie
' asked the Doctor, slowly.
　　'Yes. Dear Dr Manette, I love your daughter dearly. If there was ever love in the world, I love Lucie.'
　　'I believe you, ' said Dr Manette sadly.' It's very hard for me to speak of her at any time, but I believe you, Charles Darnay. Have you spoken to Lucie about your love
'
　　'No, never. I know how much your daughter means to you, Dr Manette. Her love for you, and your love for her, these are the greatest things in your life, and in hers. I love Lucie. With all my heart I love her. But I do not want to come between you and her. The two of you will never be separated because of me.'
　　For a moment Dr Manette turned his head away, and his eyes were full of fear, and pain. Then he looked back at Darnay, and tried to smile.
　　'You have spoken very honestly, Charles, ' he said.'Have you any reason to believe that Lucie loves you
'
　　'None！'
　　'Then what do you want from me
'
　　'A promise. A promise that if Lucie ever tells you that she loves me, you will not speak against me, and will tell her what I have said. I know that she would never accept me if she believed that it would make you unhappy.'
　　'I can promise you more than that, Charles. If Lucie ever tells me that she loves you, I shall give her to you.'
　　'Thank you, Dr Manette, 'said Darnay, gratefully.'There is one thing more. My name in England is not my real name. I want to tell you what my real name is, and why I am in England.'
　　'Stop！'said the Doctor. He had even put his hands over his ears.'I don't want to know. Tell me when I ask you. If Lucie agrees to marry you, you shall tell me on the morning of your marriage.'
　　It was dark when Darnay left Dr Manette, and it was some time later when Lucie and Miss Pross came home.
　　'Father, ' Lucie called, 'where are you
' She heard no answer, but there were strange sounds coming from her father's bedroom Frightened, she ran upstairs and found her father, pale and silent, busy at his old prison work of making shoes. The shadow of the Bastille had fallen on him again. She took his arm and spoke gently to him, and together they walked up and down for a long time until at last Dr Manette went quietly to bed.
　　Although Mr Carton visited Dr Manette's house quite often, he usually said very little when he was there. One day in August he arrived when Dr Manette was out and he was received by Lucie. She had always been a little shy with him, but on that day she noticed something different in his face.
　　'Aren't you well, Mr Carton
' she asked.
　　'No, probably not, Miss Manette, but my way of life is not good for my health.'
　　'That seems sad, ' said Lucie gently.'Why do you not change your way of life
'
　　'It's too late for that. I shall never be better than I am. But, Miss Manette, there is something that I want to say to you, but I find it so difficult. Will you listen to me
'
　　'If it will help you, Mr Carton, I will be happy to listen to you, ' said Lucie, but she was pale and trembling.
　　'Miss Manette, I know that you could never have feelings of love for me, a man who has spent his life so badly.'
　　'Even without my love, Mr Carton, can I not save you
 Can I not help you
'
　　'No, Miss Manette, ' said Carton.'Even if it was possible for you to love me, it is too late for me. I would only make you sad, and destroy your life. But it has been a last dream of my heart. To see you and your father together, to see the home that you have made for him—this has brought back old and happier memories for me.'
　　'Can I do nothing to help you
' asked Lucie sadly.
　　'Only this, Miss Manette. Let me remember that I spoke to you of the feelings of my heart, and that you were kind and gentle towards me.'
　　'Oh, Mr Carton. Try again to change.'
　　'No, Miss Manette, it is too late. My bad habits will never change now. But tell me that you will never speak of what I have said today, not to anyone, not even to the person dearest to you.'
　　'Mr Carton, ' said Lucie.'This is your secret. No one will ever know of it from me.'
　　'Thank you, Miss Manette. I shall never speak of this again. But in the hour of my death, it will be a happy memory for me that my last words of love were to you.'
　　Lucie had never heard Mr Carton speak like this before. Tears came to her eyes as she thought of his hopeless, miserable life.
　　'Don't cry, ' said Sydney Carton.'I am not worth your love. But you should know that for you, or for anyone close to you, I would do anything. Please remember always, that there is a man who would give his life to keep someone you love alive and close to you. Goodbye, Miss Manette.'
　　On the day of Lucie's marriage to Charles Darnay, Mr Lorry and Miss Pross stood, with Lucie, outside the door of Dr Manette's room. Inside, the Doctor and Mr Darnay had been talking together for a long time.
　　Soon it would be time to leave for the church. Lucie looked very beautiful, and Mr Lorry watched her proudly. He talked about the day, So long ago, when he had brought Lucie, as a baby in his arms, from France to England. Miss Pross, too, had her memories and thought fondly of her brother Solomon. He had stolen money from her many years ago and she had never seen him since then, but she still loved him.
　　The door of the Doctor's room opened and he came out with Charles Darnay. The Doctor's face was white, but he was calm. He took his daughter's arm and they went out to the waiting coach. The others followed in a second coach and soon, in a nearby church, Lucie Manette and Charles Darnay were marrined.
　　After the marriage Lucie and Charles came back to the house for breakfast, and then Lucie had to say goodbye to her father for two weeks—the first time they had not been together since his return from Paris.
　　When Lucie and Charles had left, Mr Lorry noticed a change in the Doctor. A little sadness was natural, but there was a lost, frightened look in the Doctor's eyes, which worried Mr Lorry very much. When he left to go to Tellson's Bank, he whispered to Miss Pross that he would return as quickly as he could.
　　Two hours later he hurried back to the house, and Miss Pross met him at the door.
　　'Oh, what shall we do, Mr Lorry
' she cried.'He doesn't know me, and is making shoes again！'
　　Mr Lorry went up to the Doctor's room.'Dr Manette, my dear friend. Look at me. Don't you remember me
'
　　But Dr Manette said nothing and worked on in silence. Once again, he was a prisoner in the Bastille, without friends or family, without even a name of his own.
　　For nine days and nine nights the shoemaker worked on, leaving his table only to sleep, eat, or walk up and down his room. Mr Lorry sat with him night and day, talking gently to him from time to time, trying to bring his friend's mind back to the present.
　　Then at last, on the tenth morning, the shoemaking work was put away, and Dr Alexandre Manette, pale but calm, was his old self again. Lucie was never told, and in the quiet and happy years that followed her marriage, Dr Manette remained strong in mind and body.



”
”
”
”
”
”
”



■ 6 Stormy years in France
　　In Monsieur Defarge's wine－shop in Saint Antoine customers came and went all the time. They came to drink the thin, rough wine, but more often they came to listen and to talk, and to wait for news.
　　One day there were more customers than usual. Defarge had been away for three days, and when he returned that morning, he brought a stranger with him, a man who repaired roads.
　　'Madame, ' Defarge said to his wife, 'this man, who is called Jacques, has walked a long way with me.' One customer got up and went out.'This mender of roads, ' continued Defarge, 'who is called Jacques, is a good man. Give him something to drink.' A second man got up and went out. The man who repaired roads sat down and drank. A third man got up and went out.
　　'Have you finished, my friend
' said Defarge.'Then come and see the room I promised you.'
　　They went upstairs, to the room where Dr Manette had sat making shoes. The three men who had left the wine－shop were waiting. Defarge spoke to them.
　　'No names. You are Jacques One, Jacques Two and Jacques Three. I am Jacques Four. This is Jacques Five. He brings us news of our poor friend Gaspard, whose child was killed by the Marquis's coach a year ago.'
　　'I first saw Gaspard, ' said Jacques Five, 'holding on under the Marquis's coach as it drove into our village. He ran away, but that night the Marquis was murdered. Gaspard disappeared and was only caught a few weeks ago. The soldiers brought him into the village and hanged him. And they have left his body hanging in the village square, where the women go to fetch water, and our children play.'
　　When Jacques Five had left them, Jacques One said to his friends, 'What do you say
 Shall we put their names on the list
'
　　'Yes, all of them. The castle and all of the family of Evrémonde.'
　　'Is the list safe
' asked Jacques Two.
　　'Yes, my friend, ' said Defarge.'My wife remembers everything. But more than that, every name is carefully knitted into her work. Nothing can be forgotten.'
　　A few days later Defarge reported to his wife some news from his friend'Jacques' in the police.
　　'A new spy has been sent to Saint Antoine. His name is Barsad, John Barsad. He's English.'
　　'What does he look like
 Do we know
'
　　'He's about forty years old, quite tall, black hair, thin face, ' said Defarge.
　　'Good, ' said his wife.'I'll put him on the list tomorrow. But you seem tired tonight. And sad.'
　　'Well, ' said Defarge, 'it is a long time.'
　　'It takes time to prepare for change. The crimes against the people of France cannot be revenged in a day.'
　　'But we may not live to see the end.'
　　'Even if that happens, ' replied Madame Defarge, 'we shall help it to come. But I believe that we shall see the day of our revenge against these hated noblemen.'
　　The next day a stranger came into the wine－shop. At once, Madame Defarge picked up a rose from the table and put it in her hair. As soon as they saw this, the customers stopped talking and, one by one, without hurrying, left the wine－shop.
　　'Good day, Madame, ' said the stranger.
　　'Good day, Monsieur, 'said Madame Defarge, but to herself she said, 'About forty years old, tall, black hair, thin face. Yes, I know who you are, Mr John Barsad.'
　　'Is business good
' asked the stranger.
　　'Business is bad, The people are so poor.' Madame Defarge looked over to the door.'Ah, here is my husband.'
　　'Good day, Jacques, 'said the spy.
　　'You're wrong, ' said Defarge, staring at him.'That's not my name. I am Ernest Defarge.'
　　'It's all the same, ' said the spy easily.'I remember something about you, Monsieur Defarge. You took care of Dr Manette when he came out of the Bastille.'
　　'That's true, ' said Defarge.
　　'Have you heard much from Dr Manette and his daughter
 They're in England now.'
　　'No, not for a long time.'
　　She was married recently. Not to an Englishman, but to a Frenchman. It's quite interesting when you remember poor Gaspard. Miss Manette has married the nephew of the Marquis that Gaspard killed. Her new husband is really the new Marquis, but he prefers to live unknown in England. He's not a Marquis there, just Mr Charles Darnay.'
　　Monsieur Defarge was not happy at this news. When the spy had gone, he said to his wife, 'Can it be true
 If it is, I hope that Miss Manette keeps her husband away from France.'
　　'Who knows what will happen
' replied Madame Defarge. 'I only know that the name of Evrémonde is in my list, and for good reason.' She went on calmly knitting, adding name after name to her list of the enemies of the people.
　　Time passed, and Madame Defarge still knitted. The women of Saint Antoine also knitted, and the thin hungry faces of Jacques and his brothers became darker and angrier. The noise of the coming storm in Paris was growing louder.
　　It began one summer day in the streets of Saint Antoine, around Defarge's wine－shop, with a great crowd of people. A crowd who carried guns, knives, sticks, even stones－anything that could be a weapon. An angry crowd who shouted and screamed, who were ready to fight and to die in battle.
　　'Friends and citizens！'shouted Defarge.'We are ready！To the Bastille！'The crowd began to move, like the waves of the sea.
　　'Follow me, women！'cried Madame Defarge. A long sharp knife shone brightly in her hand.'We can kill as well as any man！'
　　The living sea of angry people ran through Saint Antoine to the Bastille, and soon the hated prison was ringing with the noise of battle. Fire and smoke climbed up the high stone walls and the thunder of the guns echoed through the city.
　　Four terrible and violent hours. Then a white flag appeared above the walls and the gates were opened. The Bastille had been taken by the people of Paris！Soon the crowds were inside the building itself, and shouting'Free the prisoners！'But Defarge put his strong hand on the shoulder of one of the soldiers.
　　'Show me the North Tower. Take me to One Hundred and Five, North Tower！Quickly！'
　　'Follow me' said the frightened man, and Defarge and Jacques Three went with him through the dark prison, past heavy closed doors, up stone stairs, until they came to a low door. It was a small room, with dark stone walls and only one very small window, too high for anyone to look out. Defarge looked carefully along the walls.
　　'There, look there, Jacques Three, ' he cried.
　　'A.M.！'whispered Jacques.
　　'A.M. Alexandre Manette, ' said Defarge softly.'Let us go now.' But before they left, they searched the room and the furniture very carefully, looking for small hiding－places.
　　Then they returned to the crowds below. The Bastille and its officers were now in the hands of the people, and the people wanted revenge, and blood.
　　'At last, it has begun, my dear, ' said Defarge to his wife. It was the fourteenth of July, 1789.
　　In the village where the Marquis had lived, and where Gaspard had died, life was hard. Everything was old and tired and broken down－the people, the land, the houses, the animals. In the past everything and everybody had had to work for the Marquis, and he had given nothing in return.
　　But now, strangers were travelling about the country, strangers who were poor, like the people, but who talked about new ideas—ideas which had started in Paris and were now running like fire across the country.
　　The road－mender, who had brought the news of Gaspard to Paris, still worked repairing the roads. One day a stranger came to him as he worked on the road outside the village.
　　'Jacques, ' said the stranger. He shook the road－mender's hand, and turned to look at the Marquis's castle on the hill.
　　'It's tonight, Jacques, ' he went on quietly.'The others will meet me here.'
　　It was very dark that night and the wind was strong. No one saw the four men who came quietly to the castle and said nothing. But soon the castle itself could be seen in the dark sky. The windows became bright；smoke and yellow flames climbed into the sky. Monsieur Gabelle called loudly for help, but the people in the village watched and did nothing to save the castle where the Marquis had lived.



”
”



■ 7 A call for help
　　The troubles in France continued. The citizens of France had fought to win power, and now they used it. Castles were burned, laws were changed, and the rich and powerful nobles died—their heads cut off by that terrible new machine of death, the Guillotine. In Paris the King was put in prison, and in 1792 the people of France sent him to the Guillotine as well. The French Revolution was now three years old, but there were more years of terror to come.
　　Not all the rich nobles had died. Some had escaped to England；some had even sent or brought their money to London before the Revolution began. And Tellson's Bank, which the French emigrants used, had become a meeting－place where they could hear and talk about the latest news from France.
　　One wet August day Mr Lorry sat at his desk in the bank, talking to Charles Darnay. The years since Charles's marriage had seen the arrival of a daughter, little Lucie, who was now nine years old. Dr Manette had continued in good health, and at the centre of that warm family circle was always Lucie—a loving daughter, wife, mother, and a kind－hearted friend. Even Sydney Carton, though his old, bad ways were unchanged, was a family friend—and very much a favourite with little Lucie.
　　But at this moment Charles Darnay was trying very hard to persuade his old friend Mr Lorry not to go to France.'It's too dangerous. The weather is not good, the roads are bad, think of your age, ' he said.
　　'My dear Charles, ' said the banker.'You think that, at nearly eighty years of age, I'm too old. But that's exactly why I must go. I have the experience, I know the business. My work is to find and hide papers that might be dangerous to our customers. And anyway, Jerry Cruncher goes with me. He'll take good care of my old bones.'
　　'I wish I could go, ' said Charles restlessly.'I feel sorry for the people in France, and perhaps I could help them. Only last night, when I was talking to Lucie－'
　　'Talking to Lucie, ' repeated Mr Lorry.'You talk about your lovely wife at the same time as you talk about going to France. You must not go. Your life is here, with your family.'
　　'Well, I'm not going to France. But you are, and I'm worried about you.'
　　Just at that moment a bank clerk put an old, unopened letter on Mr Lorry's desk, and Darnay happened to see the name on it：The Marquis of Evrémonde, at Tellson's Bank,
　　London. Since his uncle's death, this was Darnay's real name. On the morning of his wedding to Lucie he had told Dr Manette, but the Doctor had made him promise to keep his name secret. Not even Lucie or Mr Lorry knew.
　　'We can't find this Marquis, ' said the clerk.
　　'I know where to find him, ' said Darnay.'Shall I take the letter
'
　　'That would be very kind, ' said Mr Lorry.
　　As soon as he had left the bank, Darnay opened the letter. It was from Monsieur Gabelle, who had been arrested and taken to Paris. Monsieur, once the Marquis
　　I am in prison, and I may lose my life, because I worked for a landowner who has left France. You told me to work for the people and not against them, and I have done this. But no one believes me. They say only that I worked for an emigrant, and where is that emigrant
 Oh Monsieur,
　　please help me, I beg you！
　　This cry for help made Darnay very unhappy. After the death of the Marquis, he had told Gabelle to do his best for the people. But now Gabelle was in prison, just because he was employed by a nobleman. It was clear to Darnay that he must go to Paris. He did not think that he would be in danger, as he had done everything he could to help the people of his village. He hoped that he would be able to save his old servant.
　　That night Charles Darnay sat up late, writing two letters. One was to his wife, Lucie；the other was to her father, Dr Manette. He told them where he had gone and why, and he promised that he would write to them from France. He had left secretly, he wrote, to save them from worrying.
　　The next day he went out, without saying anything to them of his plans. He kissed his wife and his daughter, and said that he would be back soon. And then he began his journey to Paris.
　　When he arrived in France, Darnay found that he could travel only very, very slowly towards Paris. The roads were bad and every town, every village had its citizens with guns who stopped all travellers, asked them questions, looked at their papers, made them wait or threw them in prison, turned them back or sent them on their way. And it was all done in the name of freedom—the new Freedom of France.
　　Darnay soon realized that he could not turn back until he had reached Paris and proved himself to be a good citizen, not an enemy of the people.
　　On his third night in France he was woken by an official and three other men with guns.
　　'Emigrant,' said the official.'These three soldiers will take you to Paris, and you must pay them.'
　　Darnay could only obey and at three o'clock in the morning he left with three soldiers to guard him. Even with them he was sometimes in danger；the people in the towns and villages all seemed to be very angry with emigrants, but finally they arrived safely at the gates of Paris. Darnay had to wait a long time while officials carefully read his papers, which explained the reasons for his journey. One official, seeing Gabelle's letter, looked up at Darnay in great surprise, but said nothing. Another official asked roughly：
　　'Are you Evrémonde
'
　　'Yes,' replied Darnay.
　　'You will go to the prison of La Force！'
　　'But why
' asked Darnay.'Under what law
'
　　'We have new laws, Evrémonde,' said the official sharply, 'and emigrants have no rights. You will be held in secret. Take him away.'
　　As Darnay left, the first official said quietly to him,'Are you the man who married the daughter of Dr Manette
'
　　'Yes,' replied Darnay in surprise.
　　'My name is Defarge and I have a wine－shop in Saint Antoine. Perhaps you have heard of me.'
　　'Yes. My wife came to your house to find her father.'
　　'Why did you come back to France
 It will be very bad for you.'
　　Darnay was taken to the prison of La Force and put in a cold empty room with a locked door and bars across the windows. He thought of Dr Manette and his many years alone, forgotten, in the Bastille.
　　'Now I, too, have been buried alive,' he thought.



”
”
”
”



■ 8 In the hands of the citizens
　　Tellson's Bank in Paris was in a large building south of the river, close to the heart of the city. Mr Lorry had arrived in Paris some days before Charles Darnay, and was now living in some rooms above the bank. One evening, looking out of the window, he saw that a large grindstone had been brought into the square below. There was a wild, shouting crowd around it, busy sharpening their knives and swords and axes, which were already red with blood. With shaking hands, Mr Lorry closed the window.
　　He had decided to go downstairs and talk to the bank guards, when suddenly the door of his room opened, and Lucie and her father ran in.
　　'Lucie！Manette！What has happened
 Why are you here
 ' cried Mr Lorry.
　　'Charles is in Paris, 'cried Lucie. 'He came to help an old family servant. But he's been taken to prison. '
　　At that moment the shouts of the crowd outside grew louder.
　　'What is that noise
 'asked the Doctor.
　　'Don't look out！'cried Mr Lorry.
　　'My friend, 'said the Doctor. 'I am safe in Paris. I was a prisoner in the Bastille. Every body knows about me and how I suffered. Already people want to help me；they gave us news of Charles. '
　　'Even so, don't look outside. Where is Charles
 '
　　'In the prison of La Force. '
　　'La Force！Dear Lucie, you can do nothing tonight. You must go to one of the rooms here and wait. I must told with your father at once. '
　　Lucie kissed him and left the room.
　　'Quick, Manette, 'said Mr Lorry. 'These people outside, with their bloody knives, are murdering the prisoners. If you are so well known, if you have this power, talk to them. Tell them who you are, and go to La Force. Quick, before it is too late！'
　　Dr Manette hurried outside. Mr Lorry watched from the window as the Doctor talked to the crowd. He heard shouts of 'Long live the Bastille prisoner！Help his friend in La Force！'
　　Mr Lorry went to Lucie and found her with her daughter and Miss Pross. Together they waited all night for news, but none came.
　　In the morning Mr Lorry found rooms for Lucie and her family in a quiet street near the bank. He left Jerry Cruncher with them as a guard, and returned worriedly to Tellson's. At the end of the day a strong, serious man came to see him.
　　'My name is Defarge. I come from Dr Manette；he gave me this. 'Defarge gave him a piece of paper.
　　The Doctor had written, Charles is safe, but I cannot leave this place yet. Take Defarge to Lucie.
　　'Come with me, 'said Mr Lorry happily. They went downstairs and at the front door found Madame Defarge, knitting. Without a word, she joined them, and Mr Lorry led them to Lucie's rooms.
　　There, Defarge gave Lucie a note from her husband.
　　Dearest—be brave. I am well, and your father has some power here. You cannot answer this, but kiss our child for me.
　　Only a short letter, but it meant so much to Lucie. Gratefully, she kissed the hands of Defarge and his wife. Madame Defarge said nothing；her hand was cold and heavy, and Lucie felt frightened of her.
　　Miss Pross came in with little Lucie.
　　'Is that his child
 'asked Madame Defarge, stopping her knitting to stare.
　　'Yes, Madame, 'said Mr Lorry. 'That is our poor prisoner's little daughter. '
　　'It is enough, my husband, 'said Madame Defarge. 'We can go now. 'Her voice was as cold as her hand.
　　'You will be good to my husband
 'asked Lucie, afraid. 'I beg you, as a wife and mother. '
　　'We have known many wives and mothers, 'said Madame Defarge. 'And we have seen many husbands and fathers put in prison, for many years. What is one more, among so many
 '
　　As the Defarges left, Lucie turned to Mr Lorry. 'I am more afraid of her than of any other person in Paris, 'she whispered. Mr Lorry held her hands；he did not say anything, but he was also very worried.
　　The Doctor did not come back from La Force for several days. During that time eleven hundred prisoners were killed by the people. Inside the prison Dr Manette had come before a Tribunal, which was a group of judges appointed by the people. These judges made their own laws and threw prisoners out into the streets to be murdered by the crowds. Dr Manette told the Tribunal that he had been a prisoner in the Bastille for eighteen years, and that his son－in－law was now a prisoner in La Force. The Tribunal had agreed to keep Charles Darnay safe from the murdering crowds, but they would not let him leave the prison.
　　Dr Manette seemed to become stronger as he lived through these terrible days, doing everything he could to save his daughter's husband. He was able to see Darnay regularly, but noblemen and emigrants were hated by the citizens of new France, and the Doctor could not set Darnay free. The Guillotine, that new machine of death, cut off the heads of many, many people—the powerful and the cruel, but also the beautiful, the innocent, and the good. Each day Lucie did not know if her husband would live or die. She lived every moment in great fear, but her father was sure that he could save his son－ in－law.
　　One year and three months passed and Darnay was still in prison. Dr Manette now had an official job as doctor to three prisons and was able to visit Darnay regularly. He became more and more loved by the rough people of the Revolution. But the Guillotine continued to kill.
　　'Try not to worry, 'he told Lucie. 'Nothing can happen to Charles. I know that I can save him. 'But Lucie could not see him or visit him；she could not even write to him.
　　On the day when Charles Darnay was at last called for his trial, Lucie and Dr Manette hurried to Tellson's Bank to tell Mr Lorry. As they arrived, a man got up and disappeared into another room. They did not see who it was, but in fact it was Sydney Carton, just arrived from London.
　　There were five judges in the Tribunal, and the trials were short and simple. The voices of truth, honesty, and calm reason were never heard at these trials, and most of the prisoners were sent to the Guillotine, which pleased the noisy crowds. Fifteen prisoners were called before Darnay that day, and in no more than an hour and a half, all of them had been condemned to death.
　　'Charles Evrémonde, who is called Darnay. '
　　As Darnay walked in front of the judges, he tried to remember the careful advice that Dr Manette had given him.
　　'Charles Evrémonde, you are an emigrant. All emigrants must die. That is the new law of France. '
　　'Kill him！'shouted the people. 'Cut off his head！He's an enemy of the people！'
　　The President of the judges asked Darnay, 'Is it true that you lived many years in England
 '
　　'Yes, that is true, 'replied Darnay.
　　So you are an emigrant, surely. '
　　'No, not in the meaning of the law, 'replied Darnay. 'I earn my own living in England. I have never wanted or used the name of Marquis, and I did not want to live by the work of the poor people of France. So I went to live and work in England, long before the Revolution. '
　　'And did you marry in England
 '
　　'Yes, I married a Frenchwoman. The daughter of Dr Manette, a prisoner of the Bastille and a well－known friend of all good citizens！'
　　These words had a happy effect on the crowd. Those who had shouted for his death now shouted for his life. Then Monsieur Gabelle and Dr Manette spoke for Charles Darnay. The Doctor spoke well and clearly, and was very popular with the crowd. When he had finished, the judges decided that the prisoner should be set free, and the crowd shouted their agreement loudly. Soon they were carrying Darnay in a chair through the streets of Paris to Dr Manette's house. Lucie was waiting there, and when she ran out and fell into the arms of her husband, the men and women in the crowd kissed one another and danced for happiness Darnay and Lucie were together again, safe and happy.
　　'I told you that I would save him, 'said Lucie's father proudly. 'Well, I have saved him, and you must not worry now. '
　　But Lucie was still worried. So many innocent men and women had died, for no reason, and every day brought more deaths. A shadow of fear and hate lay over France, and no one knew what dangers the next day would bring.
　　* * *
　　It was not possible to leave Paris at once, as Charles did not have the necessary papers. They must live quietly, and hope to leave as soon as they could.
　　But that night, when Dr Manette, Charles and Lucie were sitting together, they heard a loud knock at the door.
　　'What can this be
 'said Lucie, trembling. 'Hide Charles！ Save him！'
　　'My child, 'said the Doctor, 'I have saved him. He is a free man！'
　　But when he opened the door, four rough men pushed their way into the room.
　　'The Citizen Evrémonde, where is he
 He is again the prisoner of the people. '
　　'I am here, 'said Darnay. 'But why am I again a prisoner
 '
　　'You are accused by citizens of Saint Antoine. '
　　Dr Manette had said nothing. He seemed to be made of stone, but suddenly he spoke.
　　'Will you tell me who has accused my son－in－law
 '
　　'I shouldn't tell you this, 'said one of the men, 'but Citizen Evrémonde, called Darnay, is accused by Monsieur and Madame Defarge, and by one other person. '
　　'What other
 '
　　'You will hear that tomorrow, 'replied the man.



 ”
 ”
 ”
 ”
 ”
 ”
 ”



■ 9 The spy
　　While this was happening, Miss Pross was out shopping for the family. Jerry Cruncher was with her, and they had just gone into a wine－shop when Miss Pross suddenly stopped, looked at one of the customers, and cried out in a loud voice,
　　'Oh Solomon, dear Solomon！I've found you at last, dear brother！But whatever are you doing here in Paris
 '
　　'Don't call me Solomon. You'll get me killed. Pay for your wine, and come outside, 'said the man in a low, frightened voice.
　　They went outside. 'You mustn't recognize me here, 'said the man. 'It's not safe. Go your way, and let me go mine. '
　　Miss Pross began to cry at these unbrotherly words, and Jerry Cruncher stepped forward to stare in the man's face.
　　'Wait a minute, 'said Jerry. 'Is your name John Solomon, or Solomon John
 Your sister calls you Solomon. I know that your name's John；I remember that. But your other name wasn't Pross at that Old Bailey trial. What was your name then
 '
　　'Barsad！'said another voice.
　　'Yes, Barsad, that's it, 'cried Jerry. He turned round and saw Sydney Carton standing behind him.
　　'Don't be alarmed, my dear Miss Pross, 'said Carton, smiling at her. 'But I'm afraid I have to tell you that your brother is a spy, a spy for the French prisons. '
　　Solomon Pross, also Barsad, went pale. 'That's not true！'
　　'I saw you come out of the Conciergerie today. I followed you, 'said Carton, 'and I found out what you do. And I've decided that you may be able to help me. Come with me to the office of Mr Lorry. '
　　After a short argument, which Carton won, Barsad followed him to Mr Lorry's office.
　　'I boring bad news, Carton said to Mr Lorry. 'Darnay has been arrested again. '
　　'But I was with him only two hours ago, 'cried Mr Lorry.
　　'He was safe and free！'
　　'Even so, he has been arrested and taken to the Conciergerie. And I'm not sure that Dr Manette's good name can save him this time. So we must have Mr Barsad's help. '
　　'I will not help you, 'said Solomon Pross, called John Barsad.
　　'Oh, I think you will, 'said Sydney Carton, 'when you hear what I could say about you. Let's think. Mr Barsad is a spy, and a prison guard, but he used to be a spy in England. Is he still paid by the English
 '
　　'No one will listen to you, 'said Barsad.
　　'But I can say more, Mr Barsad, 'replied Carton.
　　Barsad had more problems than Carton knew. He could not return to England because he was wanted by the police there. And in France, before he became a prison guard for the citizens'revolution, he had been a spy for the King's officers. He knew that Madame Defarge, that terrible woman, had knitted his name into her list of enemies of the people. Most of those on her list had already been killed by the Guillotine, and Barsad did not want to be next.
　　'You seem worried, Mr Barsad, 'said Carton calmly.
　　The spy turned to Mr Lorry. 'Miss Pross is my sister, sir. Would you send her brother to his death, sir
 '
　　'The best thing for your sister, Mr Barsad, 'said Carton smoothly, 'is not to have a brother like you. I think I will inform the Tribunal that I suspect you of spying for England. You will be condemned at once, I am sure. '
　　'All right, 'Barsad said slowly, 'I'll help you. But don't ask me to do anything that will put my life in danger, because I won't do it. '
　　'You're a guard at the Conciergerie prison, where Darnay is, aren't you
 'said Carton. 'Come, let us talk privately in the next room. '
　　When Mr Carton returned alone, Mr Lorry asked what he hsd done.
　　'Not much, 'replied Carton, 'but if it goes badly for Darnay tomorrow, I can visit him once. It's all I could do. '
　　'But that will not save him, 'cried Mr Lorry sadly.
　　'I never said it would. '
　　Mr Lorry was an old man now, with a life of hard work behind him. Tears filled his eyes as he realized he could do nothing to help Lucie and her father now.
　　Sydney Carton felt very sorry for Mr Lorry. 'You're a good friend of Dr Manette and his daughter, but don't tell them about me or this meeting. It can't help Lucie. 'He paused. 'Will you go back to London soon
 '
　　'Yes, my work for Tellson's Bank here is finished. I have the necessary papers to leave Paris. I was ready to go tomorrow. '
　　'Then don't change your plans, 'said Carton, very seriously.
　　Later that night Sydney Carton visited a shop in a quiet corner of Paris. He wrote on a piece of paper the names of several powders and gave it to the shopkeeper.
　　'For you, citizen
 'asked the shopkeeper.
　　'Yes, for me. '
　　'You must be careful, citizen Keep these things separate. You know what happens if you put them together. '
　　'Perfectly, 'replied Carton.
　　He spent the rest of that night walking the streets of Paris. He watched the moon rise in the sky, he listened to the sounds of the River Seine flowing through the heart of the city, and he thought calmly about the past, and the future. He thought about all the deaths that the city had already seen…and he thought about Lucie's gentle, loving face and her sad, sad eyes.



 ”
 ”
 ”
 ”
 ”



■ 10 The secret paper
　　When Charles Darnay was led before the Tribunal the next morning, Dr Manette, Lucie and Mr Lorry were all there. The love in Lucie's eyes as she looked at her husband warmed Darnay's heart. It had the same effect on Sydney Carton, though no one saw him standing at the back of the room.
　　It was the same Tribunal who had let Darnay go free on the day before. But Revolution Laws were not as powerful as the anger of the people.
　　The President of the Tribunal asked, 'Who has accused Charles Evrémonde again
 '
　　'Three voices, 'he was told. 'He is accused by Ernest Defarge, by Teresa Defarge his wife, and by Alexandre Manette, Doctor. '
　　There was a great noise in the room when Dr Manette's name was heard. When the shouting stopped, Dr Manette stood, pale and trembling.
　　'President, this cannot be true. You know that the man who is accused, Charles Darnay, is my daughter's husband. My daughter and those who are dear to her are far more important to me than my life. Where is the liar who says that I accuse my daughter's husband
 '
　　'Citizen Manette, 'said the President, 'be calm. Nothing can be more important to a good citizen than the freedom of France. '
　　Defarge came forward to answer questions. He told how he had been at the Bastille at the beginning of the Revolution, when that. hated prison had been taken by the citizens.
　　'I knew that Dr Manette had been kept in a room known as One Hundred and Five, North Tower. It was the only name he had when he came to me in 1775. I went to the room and, hid-den in a hole, I found a written paper. It is in Dr Manette's writing. '
　　'Read it to us, 'said the President, and the crowd fell silent and listened.
　　I, Alexandre Manette, write this in the Bastille in 1767. I have been here for ten long years and I write this in my secret moments, when I can.
　　One evening in December, 1757, I was walking by the River Seine and a coach stopped beside me. Two men got out and one asked me if I was Dr Manette. When I replied that I was, they asked me to go with them, and made it clear that I could not refuse.
　　The coach left Paris and stopped at a lonely house. I could hear cries coming from a room upstairs. When I went in, I saw a young woman lying on a bed. She was young and very beautiful. She was also very ill. She kept crying out, ' My husband, my father, and my brother！'Then she listened for a moment, and began once again, 'My husband, my father, and my brother…'
　　I gave the girl something to make her calmer, but her feverish screams continued. Then I turned to question the two men. They were clearly brothers, and their clothes and voices suggested that they were noblemen. But they took care to prevent me from learning their name.
　　Before I could speak, the older brother said carelessly, 'There is another patient. 'In a different room, they showed me a boy of about seventeen. There was a sword wound in his chest and I could see at once that he was dying.
　　'How did this happen
 'I asked.
　　'He's just a crazy young peasant. He came here shouting about revenge, and made my brother fight him. 'The older brother's voice was cold and hard；he seemed to think the boy was less important than a horse or a dog.
　　The boy's eyes looked at me. 'Have you seen her…my sister
 'It was hard for him to speak.
　　'I have seen her, 'I replied.
　　'These rich nobles are cruel to us, Doctor. They destroy our land, they take our food, they steal our sisters. My sister loved a man in our village；he was sick, but she married him to take care of him But my sister is beautiful, and that nobleman's brother saw her and wanted her. They made her husband work night and day without stopping, until he dropped dead where he stood. Then they took my sister away. When my father heard what had happened, the news was too much for his poor heart and he died suddenly. I took my younger sister to a place where she is safe, and came here to find this man. He threw some money at me, tried to buy me like a dog, but I made him pull his sword and fight me to save his life. '
　　The boy's life was going fast, but he cried, ' Lift me, Doctor. 'He turned his face towards the older brother. 'Marquis, 'he said loudly, 'I call for you and your brother, and all your family, now and in the future, to pay for what you have done. 'Then he fell back, dead.
　　The young woman's fever continued, but I could not save her. She lived for several more days, and once the Marquis said to me, 'How long these peasants take to die！'
　　When she was dead, the brothers warned me to keep silent. They offered me money, but I refused it and was taken back to my home.
　　The next day I decided to write to the King's officials. I knew that nobles who did unlawful things were usually not punished, and expected that nothing would happen. But I did not realize the danger for myself. Just as I had finished writing my letter, a lady came to see me. She said she was the wife of the Marquis of Evrémonde and she had discovered what her husband and his brother had done. She wanted to help the younger sister of the girl who had died, and asked me where she could find her. Sadly, I did not know and so could not tell her. But that was how I learnt the brothers' name.
　　The wife of the Marquis was a good, kind woman, deeply unhappy in her marriage. She had brought her son with her, a boy about three years old. 'If I cannot find this poor girl, 'she said, 'I shall tell my son to continue the search after my death. You will remember that, little Charles, won't you
 '
　　The child answered, 'yes！'
　　Later that day I sent my letter to the King's officials and that night there was a knock at my door. My servant, a boy called Ernest Defarge, brought in a stranger, who asked me to come at once to visit a sick man in the next street.
　　As soon as I was outside the house, several men took hold of me violently The Evrémonde brothers came out of the darkness and the Marquis took my letter out of his pocket, showed it to me, and burned it. Not a word was spoken. Then I was brought here to this prison, my living grave.
　　I have been here for ten long years. I do not know if my dear wife is alive or dead；these brothers have sent me no news of my family. There is no goodness in their cruel hearts. I, Alexandre Manette, in my pain and sadness, I condemn them in the face of God.
　　When Defarge had finished reading, a terrible sound rose from the crowd, a long wild cry of anger and revenge. Death for the hated Marquis of Evrémonde, enemy of the people！The trial was over, and in less than twenty-four hours Charles Darnay would go to the Guillotine.



 ”
 ”
 ”



■ 11 Madame Defarge's revenge
　　Lucie held out her arms to her husband. 'Let me kiss him, one last time. '
　　Most of the citizens had gone out into the streets to shout how they hated the prisoners, but Barsad was still there.
　　'Let her kiss her husband, 'he said. 'It's just for a minute. '
　　Lucie went over to her husband and he took her in his arms. Dr Manette followed his daughter and fell on his knees before them, but Darnay pulled him to his feet, saying,
　　'No, no. Now we know how much you suffered, especially when you knew whose son I was. But you kept your feelings secret, because of your love for Lucie. We thank you, with all our hearts, for what you did. I tried so hard to do what my mother had wished, but I never found that poor girl. And how could that terrible story ever have a happy ending
 '
　　He turned to his wife. 'My dearest love, we shall meet again, in the place where there are no worries. God be with you both. '
　　As Darnay was taken away, Lucie fell to the floor, unconscious. Sydney Carton came quickly forward to help Mr Lorry and Dr Manette He carried Lucie to her coach and she was taken home. Then he carried her into the house where her daughter and Miss Pross waited, tears falling from their eyes.
　　'Before I go, 'said Sydney Carton, 'may I kiss her
 'He touched Lucie's face lightly with his lips, whispered a few words, and went into the next room.
　　'You are still very popular with the citizens, Doctor. You must try again to talk to the judges. '
　　'I'll do everything I can. Everything, 'Dr Manette said.
　　Mr Lorry went with Carton to the door.
　　'I have no hope, whispered Mr Lorry sadly.
　　'Nor have I, 'replied Carton. 'After today, no judge in Paris would even try to save him. The people would be too angry. I will return here later, to see if there is any news, but there is no real hope. '
　　He left the house and began to walk quickly towards Saint Antoine. His face was calm and serious；he looked like a man who had decided to do something. 'I must show myself to the people here, 'he thought. 'They should know that there is a man like me in the city. '
　　In Defarge's wine－shop the only customer was Jacques Three, who had been on the Tribunal that had decided Darnay should die. When Carton sat down and asked for a glass of wine, Madame Defarge looked at him carelessly at first. Then much more carefully. She went back to her husband and
　　Jacques Three, who were talking. 'He is very much like Evrémonde, 'she said softly.
　　Defarge himself looked at Carton and said, 'Yes, but only a little, 'and the three continued their conversation. Carton listened carefully, while pretending to read a newspaper.
　　'Madame is right, 'said Jacques Three. 'Why should we stop at Evrémonde
 '
　　'We must stop somewhere, said Defarge.
　　'Not until they are all dead, every one of that family, 'said his wife.
　　'You're right, but think how much the Doctor has suffered. Perhaps he has suffered enough. '
　　'Listen, 'said Madame Defarge coldly. 'Don't forget that I was that younger sister. And it was my family that suffered so much from the Evrémonde brothers. It was my sister who died, and my sister's husband, and my father；it was my brother who was killed. Tell others to stop；don't tell me！'
　　Carton paid for his wine and went out quickly on his way. He went back to Dr Manette's house, where more bad news was waiting for him. The Doctor's mind had returned to the past once again. He did not recognize his friends, and wanted only to find his old table and to make shoes.
　　'Listen to me carefully, 'Carton said to Mr Lorry. 'I believe that Lucie, her daughter, and perhaps even her father are in great danger. I heard Madame Defange talking about them tonight. They must leave Paris tomorrow. They have the necessary papers, and so do you. Here are mine－take them and keep them safe with your own. You must leave by coach at two o'clock tomorrow. Keep a place for me in the coach, and don't leave without me. Promise that you will do exactly what I have said. Many lives will depend on it. '
　　'I promise, 'said Mr Lorry.



 ”
 ”



■ 12 A change of clothes
　　Charles Darnay passed his last night alone in the prison.
　　He had no hope. He knew he must die, not for anything he had done wrong, but for the crimes of his father and his uncle. He sat down to write to his wife：
　　I knew nothing about the time your father spent in prison until he told me. Even then I did not know that it was my family that had been so cruel to him. I told your father that my real name was Evrémonde, and he made me promise not to tell you. I am sure that he had forgotten the paper he had written, but what has happened now is not his fault. Take care of him and our child, and one day we shall all meet again in the happier world that comes after death.
　　Darnay did not sleep peacefully that night and in the morning he walked up and down his prison, waiting. He counted the hours—nine, gone for ever, ten, eleven, twelve gone for ever. At one o'clock he heard someone outside the door. The door opened and closed and there stood Sydney Carton, holding a warning finger to his lips.
　　'Be quiet！I come from your wife. She begs you to do exactly what I say, and to ask no questions. There is no time. Take off your boots and put on mine. '
　　'Carton, my dear friend, 'said Darnay, 'it is impossible to escape from this place. You will only die with me. '
　　'I'm not asking you to escape. Put on my shirt, and my coat. 'He did not allow Darnay time to argue or refuse. 'Now sit down and write what I say, 'he said. 'Quickly, my friend, quickly！'
　　'If you remember, 'he said, and Darnay wrote, 'the words we spoke so long ago, you will understand this when you see it. 'As he said this, Carton took his hand from his pocket.
　　'What is that in your hand
 'asked Darnay.
　　'Nothing. Have you written“see it”
 Good, now go on writing, 'said Carton quietly. 'I am happy that I can prove them now. This is not a reason for sadness. 'Carton's hand was close to Darnay's face, and he gently pressed a cloth against Darnay's nose and mouth. A minute later Darnay lay unconscious on the ground. Carton quickly dressed himself in Darnay's clothes, and pushed the note that Darnay had written inside Darnay's pocket. Then he went to the door and called softly, 'Come in now. '
　　The spy Barsad came in.
　　'Quick, help me, 'said Carton. 'You must help me to the coach. '
　　'You
 'asked the spy.
　　'Him, man, I've changed places with him. You can say that it was too much for him, saying his last goodbye to his friend. That happens quite often, I believe. '
　　'Yes, often, 'replied Barsad. 'But do you promise to keep me out of danger, and go on with this plan to the end
 The number must be right. Fifty－two prisoners must die today. '
　　'Have I not already promised to be true to the death
 Hurry, man！Take him to Mr Lorry, put him in the coach
　　yourself, and tell Mr Lorry to leave at once！'
　　Barsad called two men into the room, and told them to lift the unconscious man and carry him out.
　　'The time is short, Evrémonde, 'said Barsad, in a warning voice.
　　'I know it well, 'replied Carton. 'Be careful with my friend, and leave me. '
　　The door closed and Carton was left alone. He listened care－fully but there were only normal prison sounds. No shouts, no alarm bells. He waited calmly.
　　Soon he heard the sound of doors opening. The door of his prison cell opened and a man said, 'Follow me, Evrémonde！'and Carton followed him into a large, dark room.
　　There were many people there, some standing, some sitting, some walking about, some crying. Most of them stood, silent, looking at the ground. A young woman came up to him；she was thin and pale.
　　'Citizen, Evrémonde, 'she said. ' I was with you in La Force. '
　　'True, 'he said softly, 'but I forget what you were accused of. '
　　'I am innocent. What could a poor little thing like me do
 I am not afraid to die, Citizen Evrémonde, but I have done nothing.
　　Her sad smile as she said this touched Carton's heart.
　　'They say that the Revolution will do so much good for the poor people, 'said the girl. 'How can my death help the poor
 If it is true, I am willing to die, but I do not know how that can be. I heard that you were set free, Citizen Evrémonde, 'she went on. 'I hoped it was true. '
　　'It was, but I was taken again, and condemned. '
　　'When we go from here, Citizen Evrémonde, will you let me hold your hand
 I am not afraid but I am little and weak, and it will help to make me brave. 'The young girl looked into his face and he saw a sudden doubt come into her eyes, followed by surprise. He touched his lips with his finger.
　　'Are you dying for him
 'she whispered.
　　'And his wife and child. Yes. '
　　'Oh, will you let me hold your brave hand, stranger
 '
　　'Yes, my poor sister, to the last. '






■ 13 The last goodbyes
　　At that same hour in the early afternoon a coach going out of Paris drives up to the gates of the city.
　　'Who goes there
 Show us your papers！'The guard looks at the papers. 'Alexandre Manette, Doctor. Which is he
 '
　　This is Dr Manette；this helpless old man, whispering crazily to himself.
　　'The last few days of the Revolution have been too much for him, 'said the guard with a cruel laugh. 'Lucie his daughter. The wife of Evrémonde. Which is she
 '
　　This is she. With her child, little Lucie, beside her.
　　'Hah, your husband has another meeting today. Sydney Carton. Lawyer, English. Which is he
 '
　　He is here, in the corner. He is not well.
　　'And Jarvis Lorry. Banker, English. Which is he
 '
　　'I am he, and the last, 'says Jarvis Lorry.
　　'Here are your papers, Jarvis Lorry. You may go. '
　　There are wildly beating hearts in the coach, and trembling hands；there is the heavy breathing of the unconscious traveller. But onwards the coach goes；the horses are fast, and there are no shouts behind them on the road.
　　Also that afternoon Madame Defarge was talking with her friends.
　　'My husband is a good citizen, but he is not strong enough. He feels sorry for the Doctor. I say that all the Evrémonde people must go to the Guillotine. The wife and the child must follow the husband. '
　　'They're both fine heads for the Guillotine, 'said Jacques Three. 'Their heads will be a pretty sight when they are shown to the people. Yes, they too, must die. '
　　'But I'm afraid that my husband may warn them and let them escape, 'Madame Defarge went on, 'and I must do something myself. After the death of Evrémonde at three this afternoon we'll go to the Tribunal and accuse them. '
　　The others agreed willingly. 'No one must escape. More heads must fall. '
　　'Lucie Manette will be at home now, waiting for the moment of her husband's death, 'said Madame Defarge. ' I will go to her. She will say things against the Revolution, and condemn herself. Here, take my knitting and keep my usual seat near the Guillotine. '
　　'Don't be late, 'said her friend.
　　'To see the death of Evrémonde, I shall not be late, 'replid the cruel voice of Madame Defarge.
　　There were many women in Paris at that time who hated the nobles and wanted to see them die. But of all these women, Madame Defarge was the one most feared. All her life she had been filled with hate. It was nothing to her that an innocent man was going to die because of his father's and his uncle's crimes. She wanted more. Hidden in her clothes were a gun and a sharp knife, and with her usual confident step, she began to walk to Dr Manette's house.
　　The house was not yet empty. Miss Pross and Jerry Cruncher were there, preparing to follow Mr Lorry's coach. Mr Lorry had decided that two coaches were better than one；with fewer passengers, each coach would travel faster. But Miss Pross was still worried. A second coach leaving from the house might suggest an escape.
　　'Mr Cruncher, 'she said, 'you must go and stop our coach coming here. Drive to the church instead, and I'll meet you there at three o'clock. '
　　Jerry hurried away. It was twenty past two, and at once Miss Pross began to get herself ready to leave. She was washing her face when she suddenly looked up and saw a figure standing in the room.
　　Madame Defarge looked at her coldly. 'The wife of Evrémonde；where is she
 '
　　Miss Pross quickly stood in front of the door to Lucie's room. 'You're a cruel, dangerous woman, but you won't frighten me, 'she said, breathing hard.
　　Each woman spoke in her own language, and neither understood the other's words. But Madame Defarge knew that Miss Pross was a true friend of the Doctor's family, and Miss Pross knew that Madame Defarge was the family's enemy.
　　'I wish to see the wife of Evrémonde. Go and tell her. Do you hear me
 'said Madame Defarge. She stared angrily at Miss Pross, but Miss Pross stared back just as angrily.
　　'I am desperate, 'said Miss Pross. 'I know that the longer I can keep you here, the greater hope there is for my darling girl. If you fight me, I'll fight back！'
　　Madame Defarge stepped forward and called loudly, 'Citizen Doctor！Wife of Evrémonde！Answer me！'
　　There was no answer and Madame Defarge quickly opened three of the doors and saw that the rooms were empty. One door was still closed.
　　'If they are not in that room, they are gone. But they can be followed and brought back. 'She went towards the door, but Miss Pross jumped forward and held her round the waist. Madame Defarge was used to the fighting in the streets and was strong, but love is stronger than hate and Miss Pross did not let go. Madame Defarge tried to pull out her knife.
　　'No, 'said Miss Pross, 'it's under my arm. You shall not have it. '
　　Madame Defarge put her hand to the front of her dress and began to pull out the gun. Miss Pross looked down, saw what it was, and hit out at it wildly. There was a loud bang, and a cloud of smoke, and Miss Pross stood alone, trembling with terror.
　　All this in a second. As the smoke cleared, Miss Pross saw the lifeless body of Madame Defarge on the ground. In horror, she opened her mouth to call for help, but then she thought of the dangers this would bring for her dear Lucie. With shaking hands, she got her hat and coat, locked the door of the room, and went downstairs. As she crossed the bridge on the way to the church, she dropped the key of the locked room in the river and hurried on to meet Jerry Cruncher.
　　* * *
　　As the death－carts carry the condemned prisoners through the streets of Paris, crowds watch to see the faces of those who are to die. In the chairs around the Guillotine, the friends of Madame Defarge are waiting for her. 'Teresa, Teresa Defarge！Who has seen her
 She's never missed before！'
　　But the death－carts have arrived, and the Guillotine has already begun its work. Crash！—A head is held up, and the women who sit knitting count One.
　　The supposed Evrémode helps the young girl down from the cart. He carefully places her with her back to the Guillotine, and she looks up gratefully into his face.
　　Because of you, dear stranger, I am calm. I think you were sent to me by God, 'she whispers.
　　'Or perhaps He sent you to me, 'says Sydney Carton. 'Keep your eyes on me, dear child, and do not think of anything else. '
　　'I do not mind while I hold your hand. I shall not mind when I let it go, if they are quick. '
　　'They are quick. Fear not！'
　　She kisses his lips；he kisses hers. Now the Guillotine is waiting. The young girl goes next, before him. The women count Twenty－Two, and Carton walks forward.
　　Twenty-Three.
　　They said of him that it was the most peaceful face ever seen there What passed through Sydney Carton's mind as he walked those last steps to his death
 Perhaps he saw into the future…
　　'I see Barsad, Defarge, the judges, all dying under this terrible machine. I see a beautiful city being built in this terrible place. I see that new people will live here, in real freedom. I see the lives for whom I give my life, happy and peaceful in that England which I shall never see again. I see Lucie when she is old, crying for me on this day every year, and I know that she and her husband remember me until their deaths. I see their son, who has my name, now a man. I see him become a famous lawyer and make my name famous by his work. I hear him tell his son my story.
　　'It is a far, far better thing that I do, than I have ever done；it is a far, far better rest that I go to, than I have ever known. '



 ”
 ”
 ”
 ”
 ”

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Gulliver's Travels by Jonathan Swift





■ 1 A voyage to Lilliput
　　I was born in Nottinghamshire and was the third of five sons．My father was not a rich man， but he was able to send me to Cambridge University，where I studied for three years．When I left college，I continued my studies and became a doctor．But I always wanted to travel，and so I made several voyages as a ship's doctor．When I married my wife Mary，however，I planned to stay at home for a while．But after a few years I discovered I was not earning enough money from my patients．I decided to go to sea again，and this time I joined a ship sailing to the islands in the South Pacific Ocean．We started our journey from Bristol on May 4th，1699．
　　At first our voyage went well．We sailed across the Atlantic，round the coast of Africa and into the Indian Ocean．But before we could reach the Pacific，a violent storm hit us and drove us to the north-west of Tasmania．The wind drove our ship on to a rock， which broke the ship in half．Some of the sailors and I managed to get a boat into the water，and we rowed away to look for land．But when we were too tired to row any more，a great wave hit our small boat，and we all fell into the sea．I do not know what happened to my companions，but I suppose they were all drowned．
　　The wind and waves pushed me along as I struggled to keep my head above water．I became very tired and soon felt I could not swim any more．Luckily，just then my feet touched the ground．I walked out of the sea and on to a beach，where there was no sign of any people or houses．I was so exhausted that I lay down and went to sleep．
　　When I woke up next morning， and tried to get up，I could not move．I was lying on my back and my whole body， my arms and legs were strongly fastened to the ground．Even my hair，which was long and thick，was tied to the ground．The sun began to grow hot，and I was very uncomfortable．Soon I felt something alive moving along my leg and up my body to my face，and when I looked down，I saw a very small human being，only fifteen centimetres tall．He had a bow and arrow in his hands，and there were forty more of these little men fol－lowing him．I was so surprised that I gave a great shout．They all jumped back，very frightened，and some hurt themselves by falling off my body．Meanwhile，I was struggling to unfas－ten myself，but just as I managed to pull my left arm free of the ropes，I felt a hundred arrows land on my free hand，and more arrows on my face and body．This was very painful，and made me cry aloud．I lay quietly，to see what would happen next．
　　When they saw I was no longer struggling，they quickly built a platform next to my head，and an official climbed up there to speak to me．Although I could not understand his lan－guage，I understood that they would be friendly towards me-if I did not try to harm them．By now I was extremely hungry，so I used sign language to beg the official for food．He seemed to understand me，because immediately ladders were put against my sides and little men climbed up with baskets of food and drink．They were surprised at how much I could eat and drink．In just one mouthful I ate three of their meat dishes and three of their loaves of bread．I drank two of their barrels of wine，and was still thirsty，because that was only half a litre．While they were bringing me food，I wondered whether to pick up a handful of the little men and throw them to their death．But I was afraid they would shoot at me again，and anyway I was grateful for their kindness in giving me food and drink，so I did not move．
　　After some time，another official climbed up to the platform and spoke to me．From his signs I understood that they were going to move me．The King of this country（which was called Lilliput）had ordered his people to carry me to the capital city，about a kilometre away．I made signs to ask whether I could be untied，but the official politely refused．
　　While I was eating，a platform had been prepared to carry me．The people of Lilliput，known as the Lilliputians，are very intelligent and clever with their hands．For me，five hun-dred men built a special wooden platform with twenty－two wheels．Nine hundred of the strongest men worked for about three hours to lift me on to the platform，and one thousand five hundred of the King's largest horses（each eleven and a half centimetres high）pulled me to the capital．I did not know about any of this，because they had put a sleeping powder in my wine， and I was in a deep sleep．
　　The King had decided I would stay in the largest available building，just outside the city gates．Its door was only a metre high and half a metre wide，so I could only just get inside on my hands and knees．My guards put ninety－one chains on my left leg，so that I could not escape．Then they cut the ropes that tied me and I was able to get to my feet．As I stood up，I heard cries of astonishment all around me．I felt rather miser－able，but at least I could walk about now，in a two-metre cir-cle．I was certainly an interesting sight for the Lilliputians，who had come out of the city in crowds of several thousand to see me．
　　Now I had a good view of the countryside．The fields looked like flowerbeds in a garden，and even the tallest trees were on-ly two metres high．
　　I was soon visited by the King himself．He has a strong，handsome face，and is very popular among his people．He ar-rived with his Queen，his children，and his lords and ladies，all dressed in beautiful gold and silver clothes．In order to make conversation easier，I lay on my side so that my face was close to him． I spoke to him in all the languages I knew， but we still could not understand each other．
　　The King ordered his people to make me a bed，using six hundred Lilliputian beds．It was not very comfortable，but it was better than sleeping on the stone floor．He ordered the crowds of sightseers to go back to their homes， so that the work of the country could continue and I would not be annoyed．For a long time he discussed with his lords in private what should be done with me．I was told all this later by a good friend of mine．Clearly，such a large person could be a danger to his small people．At last it was decided that， as I had behaved so well up to now，I would be kept alive．Food and drink would be brought to me every day from all the vil－lages，six hundred people would be my servants，three hun－dred men would make me a new suit，and six teachers would teach me their language．
　　And so in about three weeks I began to speak the language of Lilliput．The King often visited me， and every time he came，I asked him to take off my chains．He explained that first I must promise not to fight against Lilliput or hurt Lil－liputians，and that I must be searched for weapons．I agreed to both these things and carefully picked up two of his officers in my hands．I put them first in one pocket，then moved them to all my other pockets，except two which I kept secret．As they searched，they wrote down in a notebook details of all the things they found．
　　Afterwards I read some of their report：
　　‘In the second coat pocket we found two very large pieces of wood，and inside them were great pieces of metal，very sharp．In another pocket there was a most wonderful engine，at the end of a long chain．The engine was inside a huge round con－tainer，which was made half of silver and half of another metal．This second metal was very strange as we could see through it to some mysterious writing and pictures．The en－gine made a continuous loud noise．’
　　The officers could not guess what these things were， but they were，of course，my two pocket knives and my watch．They also found my comb，a purse with several gold and silver coins，my gun and bullets．
　　The King wanted to know what the gun was used for．
　　‘Bring it out，’he ordered me，‘and show me how it works．’
　　I took the gun out and put a bullet into it．
　　‘Den't be afraid，’I warned the King． Then I fired the gun into the air．
　　It was the loudest noise the Lilliputians had ever heard．Hundreds of them thought they were dead，and fell down．The King himself was very frightened．As I gave my gun to the officials to keep，I warned them to be careful with it．They allowed me to keep all my other things，and I hoped that one day soon I would be free．






■ 2 Life in Lilliput
　　I was careful to behave as well as possible，to persuade the King to give me my freedom．Lilliputians soon began to lose their fear of me．They called me the Man－Mountain．Sometimes I lay down and let them dance on my hand，and from time to time children came to play games in my hair． By now I was able to speak their language well．
　　One day the King invited me to watch the regular entertain－ments，which are greatly enjoyed by him，his family，and his lords and ladies．I was most interested in the rope－dancing． A very thin rope is fixed thirty centimetres above the ground．People who want to become the King's most important officials jump and dance on this rope，and whoever jumps highest with-out falling gets the best job．Sometimes the King orders his lords to dance on the rope，to show that they can still do it．This sport is，of course，rather dangerous，and there are occa－sional deaths as a result．It seems a strange way of choosing of－ficials．
　　There was another interesting entertainment．The King holds a stick in front of him，and sometimes moves it up and down．One by one， people come up to him and jump over the stick or crawl under it．They go on jumping and crawling as the King moves the stick．The winner is the one who jumps and crawls for the longest time，and he receives a blue ribbon to wear round his waist．The second best receives a red ribbon，and the third best gets a green one．Many of the Lil－liput lords wear their ribbons proudly at all times．I had cer－tainly never seen entertainment like this in any of the countries I had visited before．
　　Some days later a strange black thing was seen on the beach where I had first arrived in Lilliput．When the people realized it was not alive，they decided that it must belong to the Man- Mountain，and the King ordered them to bring it to me． I thought I knew what it was．When it arrived，it was rather dirty because it had been pulled along the ground by horses．But I was delighted to see that it was in fact my hat．I had lost it in the sea when swimming away from the ship．
　　I begged the King so often for my freedom that at last he and his lords agreed that I need not be a prisoner any longer．However，I had to promise certain things：
　　·to help the Lilliputians in war and peace
　　·to give two hours’warning before a visit to their capital，so that people could stay indoors
　　·to be careful not to step on any Lilliputians or their animals
　　·to carry important messages for the King if necessary
　　·to help the King's workmen carry heavy stones
　　·to stay in Lilliput until the King allowed me to leave．
　　On his side the King promised I would receive food and drink，enough for 1，724 Lilliputians．I agreed to everything at once．My chains were broken，and I was free at last！
　　The first thing I did was visit the capital city．The people were warned，so that they would not be in danger．I stepped carefully over the city wall，which was less than a metre high，and walked slowly through the two main streets．It is usually a very busy city，with shops and markets full of people， but to-day the streets were empty．There were crowds watching me from every window．In the middle of the city is the King's palace．The King had invited me to enter it，so I stepped over the surrounding wall into the palace garden．But unfortunately the palace itself has walls a metre and a half high around it．I did not want to damage these walls by trying to climb over them．So I walked carefully back out of the city and into the King's park．Here I cut down several of the largest trees with my knife，and made two wooden boxes．When I returned to the palace with my boxes， I was able to stand on one box on one side of the wall and step on to the other box on the other side．I lay down on the ground and looked through the win－dows，right into the King's rooms．You cannot imagine a more beautiful place to live in．The rooms and furniture are perfect in every detail．As I was looking in， I could see the Queen，surrounded by her lords and ladies．She kindly put her hand ont of the window for me to kiss．
　　I think I should give you some general information about Lilliput．Most Lilliputians are about fifteen centimetres tall．The birds and animals are，of course，much smaller than the people，and the tallest trees are only a little taller than I am．
　　All crimes here are punished．But if someone is accused of a crime and then it is proved that the accuser is lying，the accus-er is immediately killed．Lilliputians believe that there are two sides to the law．Criminals must be punished，but people of good character must be rewarded．So if a man can prove that he has obeyed every law for six years，he receives a present of money from the King．They also believe that any man who is honest，truthful，and good can serve his King and country．It is more important to have a good character than to be clever or intelligent．However，only those who believe in God are al- lowed to be the King’ s officials．
　　Many of their laws and customs are very different from ours，but human nature is the same in every country．The Lil－liputians，like us，have learnt bad ways—choosing officials because they are able to dance on a rope is just one example．
　　Now I shall return to my adventures in Lilliput．About two weeks after my first visit to the capital，I was visited by one of the King’ s most important officials． His name was Reldresal，and he had helped me many times since I had arrived in Lil－liput．
　　I started the conversation．‘I'm so glad they've taken away my chains，’I told him．
　　‘Well， my friend，’he answered，‘let me tell you some-thing．You're only free because the King knows we're in a very dangerous situation．’
　　‘Dangerous？’I cried．‘What do you mean？’
　　‘Lilliput has enemies at home and abroad，’he explained．‘For six years now we've had two political groups，the High－Heels and the Low－Heels．Perhaps the High－Heels were more popular in the past，but as you can see，our present King and all bis officials wear the lowest heels．The two groups hate each other，and a High－Heel will refuse to speak to a Low－Heel．That's the problem in Lilliput．Now， we're getting in－formation that the people of Blefuscu are going to attack us．Have you heard of Blefuscu？It's an island very near us， almost as large and important as Lilliput．They've been at war with us for three years，you see．’
　　‘But how did this war start？’I asked．
　　‘Well，you know，of course，that most people used to break their boiled eggs at the larger end． But our King's grandfather once cut a finger while breaking his egg this way，and so his father the King ordered all Lilliputians，from then on， to break the smaller end of their eggs． People who do that are called Small Endians．But Lilliputians feel strongly about this and some Big－Endians have fought angrily against this law．As many as eleven thousand people have been killed because they refused to break their eggs at the smaller end．Some of the Big－Endians have escaped to join our enemies in Blefuscu．The King of Blefuscu has always wanted to defeat Lilliput in war，and now we hear that he's prepared a large number of ships，which will attack us very soon．So you see，my friend，how much our King needs your help，in order to defeat his enemies．’
　　I did not hesitate for a moment．‘Please tell the King，’I answered warmly，‘that l am ready to give my life to save him or his country．’






■ 3 Lilliput at war
　　The island of Blefuscu is only about a kilometre to the north of Lilliput．I knew that just beyond the narrow sea separating the two countries there were at least fifty war－ships ready to attack us，with many other smaller ships．But I kept away from that side of the coast，so that the people of Blefuscu would not see me．I had a secret plan．
　　From the King's workmen I ordered fifty heavy metal hooks，each fastened to a piece of strong rope．I took off my coat and shoes， and walked into the sea with the hooks and ropes in my hands．The water was deep in the middle，so I had to swim for a few metres． But it only took me half an hour to get to Blefuscu．
　　When the Blefuscans saw me，they were so frightened that they jumped out of their ships and swam to the beach．I then used one hook for each ship，and tied all the ropes together at one end．While I was doing this， the enemy shot thousands of arrows at me，which caused me a lot of pain．I was afraid of getting an arrow in my eyes，but I suddenly remembered I still had an old pair of reading glasses in my pocket，so I put them on and continued my work．When I was ready，I started walking into the shallow water away from Blefuscu．As I walked through the waves，I pulled the enemy's warships be－hind me．When the people of Blefuscu realized that all their warships were disappearing，their cries were terrible to hear．
　　As I came nearer to Lilliput，I saw the King and all his lords and ladies standing on the beach．They could only see Blefuscu's warships coming closer，as I was swimming and my head was occasionally under the water．Therefore，they sup－posed that I had drowned，and that the Blefuscan ships were attacking．But when they saw me walking out of the sea， they welcomed me warmly with cries of astonishment and delight．The King himself came down to the water to meet me．
　　‘Everyone in Lilliput is grateful to you！’he cried．‘For your bravery，you will be one of my lords from now on．’
　　‘Thank you，sir，’I replied．
　　‘And now，’he continued，‘go back and steal all the ene－my's ships，so that we can defeat Blefuscu for ever！ We'll de-stroy the Big-Endians，and I'll become King of the whole world！’
　　But I would not agree to this plan．
　　‘Sir，’I replied，‘I will never help to take a brave nation's freedom away．Lilliput and Blefuscu should live in peace now．
　　The King could not persuade me，and unfortunately he nev-er forgot that I had refused to do what he wanted．Although I had saved his country from attack by Blefuscan warships， he preferred to remember my refusal．
　　From this time on，I heard from my friends that there were secret conversations in the palace between the King and some of his lords，who were jealous of me．These conversations nearly led to my death in the end．
　　About three weeks later，the King of Blefuscu sent his offi-cials to ask for peace between the two countries．After the Ble－fuscans had arranged everything with the Lilliputian officials，they came to visit me．They had heard how I had prevented the King from destroying all their ships．After thanking me，they invited me to visit their country．
　　However，when I asked the King of Lilliput if I could visit Blefuscu， he agreed，but very coldly．I learnt later that he and some of his lords considered I was wrong to have a conversa-tion with enemies of Lilliput．Now I was beginning to under-stand how difficult and dangerous political life can be．
　　A few days later I had another chance to help the King． I was woken at midnight by the cries of hundreds of Lilliputians outside my house．
　　‘Fire！Fire！’they shouted．‘The Queen's rooms in the palace are burning！Come quickly，Man-Mountain！’
　　So I pulled on my clothes and hurried to the palace． A large part of the building was in flames．People were climbing lad-ders up the walls，and throwing water on the flames， but the fire was burning more strongly every minute．At least the Queen and her ladies had escaped，but there seemed to be no way of saving this beautiful palace．Suddenly I had an idea．The evening before，I had drunk a lot of good wine，and very luckily I had not made water since then．In three minutes I managed to put out the whole fire， and the lovely old building was safe．
　　I went home without waiting for the King's thanks，because I was not sure what he would say．Although I had certainly saved the palace，I knew it was a crime，punishable by death，to make water anywhere near the palace．I heard later that the Queen was so angry that she refused to enter any of the dam－aged rooms ever again，and promised to take her revenge on me．






■ 4 Gulliver escapes from Lilliput
　　I soon discovered that Flimnap，one of the King's highest officials，was my secret enemy．He had always disliked me，although he pretended to like me， but now he began to suspect his wife of visiting me privately，and he became jealous．Of course his wife did visit me， but always with her daughters and other ladies who came for regular afternoon vis－its．When visitors arrived at my house， I used to bring the coaches and horses inside，and put them carefully on my table．There was a high edge round the table，so that nobody would fall off．I sat in my chair with my face close to the table， and while I was talking to one group of visitors， the others used to drive round the table．I spent many hours like this，in very enjoyable conversation．
　　In the end Flimnap realized that his wife was not in love with me，and had not done anything wrong， but he was still angry with me．There were other lords who also disliked me，and together they managed to persuade the King that I was a danger to Lilliput．I knew they were discussing me in private，but I was seriously alarmed when I discovered what they had decided．Luckily，as well as Reldresal，I had another good friend among the King’ s officials．Late one night he visited me secretly，in order to warn me．
　　‘You know，’he began，‘that you've had enemies here for some time．Many of the lords are jealous of your great success against Blefuscu，and Flimnap still hates you．They accuse you of crimes against Lilliput，crimes punishable by death！’
　　‘But…’I cried，‘that's not right！I only want to help Lilliput！’
　　‘Listen，’he said．‘I must tell you what I've heard，al－though my life is in danger if I do．They've accused you of making water in the King's palace，refusing to take all the en－emy's ships，refusing to destroy all the Big-Endians，seeing the enemy's officials privately，and planning to visit Blefuscu in order to help the enemy against Lilliput．’
　　‘This is unbelievable！’ I cried．
　　‘I must say，’continued my friend，‘that our King remind－ed his lords how much you had helped the country．But your enemies wanted to destroy you，and they suggested setting fire to your house at night．Then you would die in the fire！’
　　‘What！’I shouted angrily．
　　‘Be quiet，nobody must hear us．Anyway，the King decided not to kill you，and that's when your friend Reldresal started speaking He agreed you’d made mistakes，but said that a good King should always be generous，as our King is．And he suggested that a suitable punishment would be for you to lose your sight．You’d still be strong enough to work for us， but you wouldn't be able to help the Big－Endians．’
　　I covered my eyes with my hands．I had wanted to help these people and their King．How could they decide to punish me as cruelly as this？
　　‘Your enemies were most disappointed with Reldresal’ s plan，’my friend went on．‘They said you were a Big—Endi-an in your heart，and reminded the King how much you cost Lilliput in food and drink．Reldresal spoke again，to suggest saving money by giving you a little less food every day．In this way you’d become ill，and in a few months you’d die．And so they all agreed．In three days Reldresal will be sent to explain your punishment to you．He'll inform you that the King has been very kind to you， and that you're lucky to lose only your eyes．You'll be tied dowu，and very sharp arrows will be shot into your eyes．The King's doctors will make sure that you can no longer see．’
　　‘This is terrible news！’ I said，‘but thank you for warning me，my dear friend．’
　　‘You alone must decide what to do，’ he replied，‘and now I must leave you，so that nobody suspects me of warning you．’
　　When I was alone，I thought about the situation for a long time．Perhaps I was wrong，but I could not see that the King was being kind and generous in ordering such an inhuman pun-ishment．What should I do？I could ask for a trial，but I was not confident of the judges’honesty．I could attack the capital and kill all the Lilliputians，but when I remembered the King’ s past kindness to me，I did not want to do that．
　　At last I decided to escape．And so，before Reldresal came to tell me of my punishment，I went to the north of Lilliput，where our ships lay．I took my clothes off and put them into one of the largest warships．I also put a blanket into it．Then I stepped into the sea，and swam to Blefuscu．By pulling the Lilliput warship behind me， I kept my clothes and blanket dry．
　　When I arrived，the King of Blefuscu sent two guides to show me the way to the capital．There I met the King，the Queen and the lords and ladies in their coaches．I explained that I had come to visit Blefuscu，as I had been invited．How－ever，I did not say anything about the punishment waiting for me in Lilliput．They welcomed me warmly．That night，as there was no building big enough for me，I slept on the ground，covered by my blanket．It was not as comfortable as my bed in Lilliput，but I did not mind．
　　I did not spend long in Blefuscu．Only three days after my arrival，I noticed a boat in the sea，near the beach．It was a real boat，large enough for me．Perhaps it had been driven there by a storm．I swam out to it and tied ropes to it．Then，with the help of twenty of Blefuscu's ships and three thousand sailors，I pulled it on to the beach．It was not badly damaged，and it was exciting to be able to start planning my journey back to England and my home．
　　During this time，the King of Lilliput had written to ask the King of Blefuscu to send me back， as a prisoner，so that I could receive my punishment．The King of Blefuscu，however，replied that I was too strong to be taken prisoner，and that I would soon be returning to my country anyway．Secretly he invited me to stay and help him in Blefuscu，but I no longer believed in the promises of kings or their officials， so I politely refused．
　　I was now impatient to start my voyage home，and the King ordered his workmen to repair the boat and prepare everything I needed．I had the meat of one hundred cattle and three hun－dred sheep to eat on the journey，and I also had some live ani-mals to show to my friends in England．
　　About one month later，I left Blefuscu，on September 24th，1701．The King，the Queen and their lords and ladies all came down to the beach to wave goodbye．
　　After sailing all day，I reached a small island，where I slept that night．On the third day，September 26th，I saw a sail，and was delighted to discover that it was an English ship， on its way home to England．The captain picked me up，and I told him my story．At first he thought I was mad，but when I took the live animals out of my pocket to show him，he be-lieved me．
　　We arrived home at last on April 13th，1702，and I saw my dear wife and children again．At first I was delighted to be at home again．I earned quite a lot of money by showing my Lil－liputian animals to people，and in the end I sold them for a high price．But as the days passed，I became restless，and wanted to see more of the world．And so，only two months later，I said goodbye to my family and sailed away again．






■ 5 A voyage to Brobdingnag
　　I left Bristol on June 20th，1702，in a ship which was sailing to India．We had good sailing weather until we reached the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa， where we landed to get fresh water．We had to stay there for the winter，however，because the ship needed repairs and the captain was ill．In the spring we left Africa and sailed round the island of Madagascar into the Indian Ocean．But on 19th April the wind began to blow very violently from the west，and we were driv－en to the east of the Molucca Islands．On 2nd May the wind stopped blowing and the sea was calm．But our captain，who knew that part of the world very well，warned us that there would be a storm the next day．So we prepared the ship as well as we could，and waited．
　　The captain was right．On 3rd May the wind began to get stronger．It was a wild，dangerous wind，blowing from the south this time．We had to take down our sails as the storm hit our ship．Huge waves crashed down on to us，and the wind drove our helpless ship eastwards into．the Pacific Ocean．
　　For several days we struggled with the wind and waves，but at last the storm died away and the sea was calm again．Luckily，our ship was not badly damaged，but we had been driven over two thousand kilometres to the east． None of us knew exactly where we were，so the captain decided to contin-ue sailing eastwards，where we had never been before．We sailed on for another two weeks．
　　Finally，on 16th June，1703，we saw a large island with a small piece of land joined to it．I later discovered that this country was called Brobdingnag．The captain sent some of his sailors in a boat to land there and bring back some fresh water．I went with them because I was interested in seeing a new country．We were delighted to be on land again，and while the men looked for a river or a lake，I walked for about a kilometre away from the beach．
　　When I returned，to my astonishment I saw that the sailors were already in the boat．They were rowing as fast as they could towards the ship！I was going to shout to tell them they had forgotten me，when suddenly I saw a huge creature walk－ing after them into the sea．I realizea he could not catch them，because they had nearly got to the ship，but I did not wait to see the end of that adventure．I ran away from him as fast as possible，and did not stop until I found myself in some fields．The grass was about seven metres high，and the corn about thirteen metres high．It took me an hour to cross just one field，which had a hedge at least forty metres high．The trees were much taller than that．Just as I was trying to find a hole in the hedge，so that I could get into the next field，I saw an－other giant coming towards me．He seemed as tall as a moun－tain，and every one of his steps measured about ten metres．
　　In fear and astonishment I hid in the corn，and hoped he would not notice me．He shouted in a voice like thunder，and seven other giants appeared．They seemed to be his servants．When he gave the order，they began to cut the corn in the field where I was hiding． As they moved towards me，I moved away，but at last I came to a part of the field where rain had knocked down the corn．There was no longer anywhere for me to hide，and I knew I would be cut to pieces by the giants'sharp knives．I lay down and prepared to die．I could not stop myself thinking of Lilliput．There， I myself had been a giant，an important person who had become famous for helping the people of that small country．Here，it was the opposite．I was like a Lilliputian in Europe，and I began to understand how a very small creature feels．
　　Suddenly I noticed that one of the giants was very close to me．As his huge foot rose over my head，I screamed as loudly as I could．He looked around on the ground，and finally saw me．He stared at me for a moment，then very carefully， he picked me up with finger and thumb and looked at me．I was now twenty metres up in the air，and I desperately hoped he would not decide to throw me to the ground．I did not struggle，and spoke politely to him，although I knew he did not understand any of my languages．He took me to the farmer，who soon realized that I was not an animal，but an in-telligent being．He carefully put me in his pocket and took me home to show to his wife． When she saw me，she screamed and jumped back in fear， perhaps thinking I was an insect．But in a little while she became used to me，and was very kind to me．






■ 6 Gulliver and his master
　　Soon after we arrived，the whole family sat down at the table for dinner．There was a large piece of meat on a plate about eight metres across．The farmer put me on the table，with some small pieces of bread and meat in front of me．I was very frightened of falling off the edge of the table，which was ten metres from the ground．The farmer and his family were delighted to watch me eating food with my own small knife and fork．But when I started walking across the table to the farmer，his youngest son，a boy of about ten，picked me up by the legs．He held me so high in the air that my whole body trembled．Fortunately his father took me away at once，and angrily hit the boy hard on the head．But I re－membered！how cruel children can he to small animals，and I did not want the boy to take his revenge on me．So I fell on my knees and asked them not to punish the child any more．They seemed to understand．
　　Just then I heard a noise behind me．It sounded like twelve machines running at the same time．I turned my head and saw a huge cat，three times larger than one of our cows．The farmer's wife held it in her arms，so that it could not jump at me．But in fact，because I showed no fear，there was no dan-ger，and the cat even seeemed a little afraid of me．
　　At the end of dinner，a servant came in with the farmer's one-year－old son in her arms．He immediately started crying and screaming，because he wanted to play with me．His moth－er smiled and put me in his hand．When he picked me up and put my head in his mouth，I shouted so loudly that he dropped me．Luckily，I was not hurt，but it showed me how danger－ous life was going to be in Brobdingnag．
　　After eating，the farmer，or my master，as I shall now call him，went back to his work in the fields．I think he told his wife to take good care of me，because she put me carefully on her bed and locked the bedroom door．I was exhausted，and slept for two hours．
　　When I woke up，I felt very small and lonely in such a huge room，and on such a large bed．Suddenly I saw two huge rats run towards me across the bed．One came right up to my face，so I pulled out my sword and cut open his stomach．The other ran away at once．I walked up and down on the bed，to con－trol my trembling legs，and looked at the dead rat．It was as large as a big dog，and its tail measured two metres．When my master’ s wife came into the room some time later，I showed her how I had killed the rat．She was delighted that I was not hurt，and threw the dead rat out of the window．
　　My master had a daughter who was about nine years old．She was given the special responsibility of taking care of me，and I owe her my life．During my stay in her country we were always together，and she saved me from many dangerous situa-tions．I called her Glumdalclitch，which means‘little nurse’．She was good at sewing，and managed to make some clothes for me in the thinnest material available．She also made me a small bed，which was placed on a shelf too high for rats to reach．Perhaps the most useful thing she did was to teach me the language，so that in a few days I could speak it quite well．
　　Soon all my master's neighbours were talking about the strange little creature he had found in a field．One of them came to see me，and as I walked towards him across the table，he put on his glasses．His eyes behind the glasses looked like the full moon shining into two windows．I thought this was very funny，and laughed loudly．Unfortunately，that made him very angry．I heard him whispering to my master all evening，and I was sorry I had laughed at him．
　　Next day Glumdalclitch came to me in tears．
　　‘You'll never guess what's happened！’she told me sadly．
　　‘Our neighbour has advised Father to show you to people，for money！Father's going to take you to market tomorrow，where there'll be crowds of people ready to pay for entertain－ment！I'm so ashamed！And perhaps you'll get hurt！Other people won't be as careful with you as I am！’
　　‘Don't worry，Glumdalclitch，’I replied．‘As I'm a stranger here，I don't mind being shown to people like a strange wild animal．I must do what your father wants．’I was secretly hoping I would one day find a way of escaping and returning to my own country．
　　So the next day my master and his daughter got on their huge horse．Glumdalclitch carried me inside a small box，which had air－holes so that I could breathe．When we arrived at the market town，my master hired the largest room in the public house，and placed me upon the table there．His daugh－ter stayed close to me to make sure that nobody hurt me．I was told to speak in their language，pull out my sword，drink from a cup，and do other things to amuse the crowd．Only thirty people were allowed in to see me at one time．On that first day everybody wanted to see me，and I was shown to over three hundred and fifty people．
　　My master's plan was so successful that he arranged to show me again on the next market day．I did not look forward to this at all．I was so tired with the journey and the entertainment that I could only walk an speak with difficulty for the next three days．Even when we were at home，neighbours and friends from all parts of the country came to look at me，and my master made me work hard to amuse them．So I had almost no rest．
　　My master finally realized that he could make a fortune by showing me to people all over the country．So about two months after my arrival in Brobdingnag，we left the farm and started our journey to the capital．As before，Glumdalclitch came with us，to take care of me．On the way we stopped in many towns and villages，so that I could be shown to people．At last，after a journey of nearly five thousand kilometres，we arrived at the capital．Now I had to work even harder，as peo-ple came to look at me ten times a day．






■ 7 At the King's palace
　　Although Glumdalclitch tried to make things as comfort- able as possible for me，such an exhausting life was be－ ginning to have a bad effect on my health．I was becoming thinner and thinner．When my master noticed this，he thought I would not live much longer．But it was clear that he wanted to make as much money out of me as he could．While he was thinking how to do this，he was asked to bring me to the palace．The Queen and her ladies had heard about me and wanted to see me．When we arrived in front of the Queen，I fell on my knees and begged to be allowed to kiss her foot．But she kindly held out her hand to me．I took her little finger in both my arms，and put it very politely to my lips．
　　She seemed very pleased with me，and finally she said，‘Would you enjoy living here in the palace，do you think？’
　　‘Great queen，I answered，‘I must do what my master wants，but if I were free，I would want to spend my whole life obeying your orders．’
　　She immediately arranged to buy me from my master．He was delighted to receive a good price for me，especially as he felt sure I would not live longer than a month．I also begged the Queen to let Glumdalclitch stay with me，because she had always taken such good care of me．The Queen agreed，and Glumdalclitch could not hide her happiness．
　　When my master had left the palace alone，the Queen said to me，‘Why didn't you say goodbye to him？And why did you look at him so coldly？’
　　‘Madam，I must tell you，’I replied，‘that since he found me，my master has used me as an easy way of making money for himself．He's made me work so hard that I feel tired and ill．He's sold me to you only because he thinks I'm going to die soon．But I feel better already，now that I belong to such a great and good queen．’
　　The Queen was clearly surprised to hear such intelligent words from such a small creature，and decided to show me to her husband．When the King saw me，he thought at first that I must be a mechanical toy．However，when he heard my an－swers to his questions，he realized I must be alive，and he could not hide his astonishment．
　　To discover what kind of animal I was，he sent for three of his cleverest professors．After looking at me carefully，they decided that I was a creature outside the laws of nature．I was much too small to climb their trees，or dig their fields，or kill and eat their animals．They could not understand where I had come from，or how I could possibly survive．And when I told them that in my country there were millions just like me，they did not believe me，but just smiled．However，the King was more intelligent than they were．After speaking to Glumdal－ clitch and questioning me again，he realized that my story must be true．
　　They took very good care of me．The Queen's workmen made a special bedroom for me．It was a wooden box，with windows，a door，and two cupboards．The ceiling could be b lifted off，so that Glumdalclitch could change my sheets and tidy my room．The workmen even made me two little chairs and a table，and a lock for the door，so that no rats could get in．
　　The Queen became so fond of me that she could not eat without me．My small table and chair were always placed on the dinner table near her left elbow，and Glumdalclitch stood near me，in case I needed her help．I ate off tiny silver plates，with silver knives and forks But I never got used to seeing the Queen eat．In one mouthful she ate as much as twelve English farmers could eat in a whole meal．She drank from a cup as big as one of our barrels，and her knives were like huge swords．I was quite frightened of them．
　　On Wednesday，which is a day of rest in Brobdingnag，like our Sunday，the King and Queen always had dinner together，with their children，in the King's rooms．I was usually invited too．My little chair and table were at the King's left elbow．he enjoyed very much hearing me talk about England—our laws，our universities，our great buildings．He listened so po－litely that I perhaps talked a little too much about my dear country．In the end he looked at me kindly，but could not stop himself laughing．He turned to one of his lords．
　　‘How amusing it is，’he said to him，‘that an insect like this should．talk of such important matters！He thinks his country is so highly developed！But I suppose even tiny crea－tures like him have a hole in the ground that they call a home．They argue，they love，they fight and they die，as we do．But of course the poor little animals aren't on our level．’
　　I could not believe what I was hearing．He was laughing at my country，a country famous for its beautiful cities and palaces，its great kings and queens，its brave and honest people．However，there was nothing I could do about it，and I simply had to accept the situation．
　　The worst problem I had at the palace was the Queen's dwarf．Until I arrived，he had always been the smallest person in the country（he was about ten metres tall）．As I was much smaller than him，he was very rude to me and behaved very badly，especially when nobody was looking．Once he took a large bone from the table and stood it on the Queen's plate．Then he took me in both hands and pushed my legs into the top of the bone．I could not pull myself out，and had to stay there，feeling—and looking—extremely stupid．When the Queen finally saw me，she could not stop herself laughing， but she was angry with the dwarf at the same time．
　　In Brobdingnag there are large numbers of flies in summer，and these awful insects，each as big as an English bird， gave me no peace．The dwarf used to catch some in his hands，and then let them out suddenly under my nose．He did this both to frighten me and amuse the Queen．I had to use my knife to cut them to pieces as they flew around me．
　　Another time，the dwarf picked me up and dropped me quickly into a bowl of milk on the table．Luckily，I am a good swimmer，so I managed to keep my head out of the milk．As soon as Glumdalclitch saw I was in danger，she ran from the other side of the room to rescue me．I was not hurt，but this time the dwarf was sent away from the palace as a punishment．I was very pleased．
　　I would now like to describe Brobdingnag．The people who draw our European maps think there is nothing but sea be-tween Japan and America，but they are wrong．Brobdingnag is quite a large country，joined on to northwest America，but separated from the rest of America by high mountains．It is about ten thousand kilometres long and from five to eight thousand wide．The sea around it is so rough and there are so many rocks in the water that no large ships can land on any of the beaches．This means that the people of Brobdingnag do not normally have visitors from other parts of the world．






■ 8 More adventures in Brobdingnag
　　Because I was so small，I had several dangerous acci-dents during my stay at the palace．One day Glumdal－clitch put me down on the grass in the palace garden，while she went for a walk with some of the Queen's ladies．A small white dog which belonged to one of the gardeners appeared， and seemed very interested in me．He took me in his mouth and carried me to his master，Luckily，he had been well trained，and did not try to bite me，so I was not hurt．
　　One day the Queen said to me，‘It would be good for your health to do some rowing or sailing．What do you think？Would you like me to arrange it for you？’
　　‘Madam，’I answered，I’d love to row or sail a little every day．But where can we find a boat that's small enough？’
　　‘Leave that to me，’she replied，and called for her work－men．She ordered them to make a tiny boat with sails．They also made a wooden container，about a hundred metres long，seventeen metres wide and three metres deep．This container was filled with water，and I was carefully placed in my boat on the water．Every day I used to row or sail there，while the Queen and her ladies watched．There was no wind，of course，but the ladies blew hard to move my boat along．
　　I nearly lost my life again，when a lady picked me up to put me in the boat She was not careful enough，and dropped me．With horror，I felt myself falling through the air．But instead of crashing to the ground，I was caught，by my trousers，on a pin in her clothes．I had to stay there without moving a finger，until Glumdalclitch came running to rescue me．
　　But the greatest danger to me in Brobdingnag came from a monkey．One day Glumdalclitch left me alone in her bedroom while she visited some of the ladies．It was a warm day，and her window was open．I was in the box which I used as my bedroom，with the door open．Suddenly I heard the noise of an animal jumping through the window，and immediately I hid at the back of my box．The monkey，which appeared huge to me，very soon discovered my hiding－place He picked me up，and held me close to him like a baby．When he heard someone opening the bedroom door，he jumped out of the window and ran on to the roof．
　　I thought I had never been in such great danger．He was running on three legs and holding me in the fourth．At any moment he could let me fall，and we were at least three hun-dred metres above the ground．I could hear a lot of shouting in the palace The servants had realized what was happening，and brought ladders to climb up on to the roof．Glumdalclitch was crying，and hundreds of people were watching from the garden Meanwhile，the monkey was sitting calmly on top of the roof．He was taking food from his mouth and trying to push it into my mouth．He still seemed to think I was his ba－by．I suppose it was an amusing sight for the crowd below，but I was in terrible fear of falling．
　　Finally，several servants climbed on the roof，and as they came nearer，the monkey put me down and ran away．I was rescued and brought down to the ground．I had to stay in bed for two weeks after this，before I felt well enough to meet peo－ple again．The monkey was caught and killed．
　　When I next saw the King，he asked me about this experi－ence．‘How did you feel，’he said，‘when the monkey was holding you up on the roof？’
　　‘Sir，’I replied bravely，‘I was afraid，that's true．But next time an animal like that attacks me，I shall not hesitate．I'll pull out my sword like this’-and I showed him what I would do－‘and give the creature such a wound that it will never come near me again！’
　　But while I waved my tiny sword in the air，the King and his lords laughed loudly．I had wanted to prove my bravery， but I failed，because to them I was only an unimportant little creature．I realized later that this often happens in England，when we laugh at someone of no family，fortune，or intelli-gence，who pretends to be as important as our great leaders．
　　In the next few weeks，I began to have some very interest－ing conversations with the King．He was an intelligent，un－derstanding person．
　　‘Tell me more about your country，’he said to me one day．‘I would like to hear about your laws，your political life，and your customs．Tell me everything．There may be something that we can usefully copy here in Brobdingnag．’
　　‘I shall be delighted， sir，’I answered proudly．‘Our king controls our three great countries，Scotland，Ireland and Eng－land．We grow much of our own food，and our weather is nei-ther too hot nor too cold．There are two groups Of men who make our laws．One is called the House of Lords－they are men from the oldest and greatest families in the country．The other is called the House of Commons－these are the most honest，intelligent，and sensible men in the country，and are freely chosen by the people．We have judges to decide punish－ments for criminals，and we have a large army，which cannot be defeated by any other in the world．’
　　While I was talking，the King was making notes．For sev－eral days I continued my explanation，and I also described British history over the last hundred years．Then the King asked me a large number of questions．These were some of them．
　　‘How do you teach and train young people of good family？If the last son of an old family dies，how do you make new lords for the House of Lords？Are these lords really the most suitable people to make the country's laws？And in the House of Commons，are these men really so honest and intelligent？Do rich men never buy their way into this House？You say the lawmakers receive no pay，but are you sure that they never ac-cept bribes？’
　　Then he asked questions about our lawcourts．‘Why are your trials so long and so expensive？How much do your lawyers and judges really know about the laws？How carefully do they decide between right and wrong？’
　　‘And why，’he went on，‘are you so often at war？Either you enjoy fighting，or you have very difficult neighbours！Why do you need an army at all？You would not be afraid of any other country，if you were peaceful people．And in the last hundred years you've done nothing but rob，fight，and mur-der！Your recent history shows the very worst effects of cruel－ ty，jealousy，dishonesty，and madness！’
　　I tried to answer the King as well as I could，but he did not think our system was a good one．
　　‘No，my little friend’he said kindly but seriously，‘I'm sorry for you．You've proved to me that your country has nothing valuable to offer us．Perhaps once，in the past，your political life was adequately organized，but now it is clear that there is laziness and selfishness in every part of the system．Your politicians can be bribed，your soldiers aren't really brave，your judges and lawyers are neither reasonable nor hon-est，and your lawmakers themselves know little and do less．I sincerely hope that you，who have spent most of your life trav-elling，have a better character than most Englishmen．But from what you've told me，I'm afraid that your countrymen are foe worst little nation of insects that has ever crawled upon the ground．’
　　I am very sorry to have to report these words of the King’ s，and I only do so because of my love of the truth．I must tell you exactly what happened，even if I do not agree with it．I had to listen patiently，while he was giving his extraordinary opinions of my dear country．We must remember，however，that this King lives in a country almost completely separate from the rest of the world．Because he does not know other countries systems or customs，he has a certain narrowness of thinking，which we Europeans do not have，of course.
　　You will find it difficult to believe what happened next．
　　‘Sir，’I said，‘I’d like to give you something to thank you for your kindness to me since I arrived at the palace．Three or four hundred years ago，we Europeans discovered how to make a special powder．When you set fire to it，it burns and ex-plodes immediately，with a noise louder than thunder．You can use it to shoot heavy balls of metal from large guns．It can destroy the largest ships，it can kill a whole army，it can cut men's bodies in half，it can destroy the strongest walls．It's called gunpowder，and it's easy and cheap to make．To show you how grateful I am to you，I'm offering to explain how to make it-then you will be able to destroy all your enemies！’
　　I was very surprised by the King's reply．
　　‘No！’he cried in horror．‘Don't tell me！I don't want to know how to murder people like that．I would rather give half my country away than know the secret of this powder．How can a tiny creature like you have such inhuman，cruel ideas？Never speak to me of this again！’
　　How strange that such an excellent king should not take the chance I was offering him！No European king would hesitate for a moment But he had other strange ideas．He believed，very simply，that every problem can be solved by honest，sen-sible people，and that the political life of a country must have no secrets and must be open for all to see and understand．Of course，we know that this is impossible，so perhaps his opinion of us is not worth considering．






■ 9 Gulliver escapes from Brobdingnag
　　I was still hoping to return to England one day．But the ship in which I had arrived in Brobdingnag was the first that had ever come near the coast．So I could not see how I could get away．I began to think more and more about my family and my home．
　　By now I had been in Brobdingnag for about two years．When the King and Queen travelled to the south coast，Glum－dalclitch and I went with them．I really wanted to be close to the sea again，which I had not seen or even smelt for so long．As Glumdalclitch was ill，I asked a young servant to take me down to the beach for some fresh air．The boy carried me in my travelling box，and put me down on the beach，while he looked for birds’eggs among the rocks．I looked sadly at the sea，but stayed in my box，and after a while I fell asleep．
　　I was woken suddenly when my box was lifted high in the air．I can only suppose that a large bird took hold of the ring on top of the box with his talons，and flew away with it．Through the windows I could see the sky and clouds passing by，and I could hear the noise of the bird's wings．Then I was falling，so fast that I felt quite breathless．There was a loud crash，as the box fell into the sea．Perhaps the bird had been attacked by others，and so had to drop what he was carrying．
　　Several hours passed，and then I suddenly heard a strange noise above my head People were fastening a rope to the ring．Then my box was pulled through the water．Was it a ship that was pulling me along？
　　‘Help！Help！’I shouted as loudly as I could．
　　I was delighted to hear English voices reply．
　　‘Who's there？’they cried．
　　‘I'm English！’I shouted back desperately．‘Please help me to get out of here！Just put your finger into the ring on top of the box and lift it out of the water！Quickly！’
　　There were great shouts of laughter．
　　‘He's mad！’I heard one man say．
　　‘Ten men couldn't lift that huge box！’said another．There was more laughter．
　　Indeed，because I had been with giants for so long，I had forgotten that my countrymen were as small as me．The only thing the sailors could do was to cut a hole in the top of my box，and help me to climb out．I was exhausted and unable to walk far．
　　They took me to their captain．
　　‘Welcome to my ship，’he said kindly．‘You're lucky we found you．My men saw that huge box on the water，and we decided to pull it along behind the ship．Then we realized there was a man inside！Why were you locked up in there？Was it a punishment for some terrible crime？But tell me all about it later．Now you need to sleep，and then eat．’
　　When I told him my story，a few hours later，he found it difficult to believe．But after a while he began to accept that what I told him must be true．
　　‘But why do you shout so loudly？’he asked．‘We can hear you perfectly well if you speak normally．’
　　‘You see，’I explained，‘for two years I've had to shout to make myself understood by the giants．I was like a man in the street who was trying to talk to another man at the top of a very tall building．And another thing-your sailors all seem very small to me，because I've been used to looking up at peo－ple twenty metres tall．’
　　He shook his head．‘Well，what a story！I think you should write a book about it when you get home．’
　　I stayed on the ship for several months，as we sailed slowly home to England．Finally，we arrived in Bristol on June 3rd，1706．When I reached home，my wife made me promise never to go to sea again，and I thought my adventures had come to an end．






■ 10 The flying island of Laputa
　　I had only been at home for about ten days when a friend of mine asked me to join him on a journey to the East Indies．I still wanted to see more of the world，and as he was offering to give me double the usual pay，I managed to per-suade my wife to let me go．The voyage took eight months，and after stopping for a short time in Malaysia，we arrived in the Gulf of Tongking．
　　‘I'll have to stay here for a while on business，’my friend the captain told me．‘But you can take the ship and some of the sailors．Go and see what you can buy and sell in the islands around here．’That sounded interesting to me，so I agreed．
　　Unfortunately，we sailed straight into a terrible storm，which drove us many miles eastward．Then，by a very unlucky chance，we were seen and chased by two pirate ships．Our ship was not fast enough to escape，and the pirates caught us．They decided to keep the sailors to help sail the ship，but they did not need me．I suppose I was lucky they did not kill me．Instead，they left me alone in a small boat in the middle of the ocean，with only enough food for a few days，while they sailed away．
　　I am sure the pirates thought I would die．However，I saw land some hours later，and I managed to sail the boat to it．As I stepped out of the boat and walked up the beach，I noticed that although the sun had been very hot，the air suddenly seemed cooler．At first I thought a cloud was passing over the sun But when I looked up，I saw，to my great astonishment，a large island in the sky，between me and the sun．It was moving towards me，and there were people running around on it．I waved my arms and shouted as loudly as possible．‘Help！Help！’I cried．‘Rescue me！’
　　When the island was about a hundred metres over my head，they let down a seat on a chain．I sat on it，and was pulled up to the island．I had discovered the flying island of Laputa．
　　Laputans are certainly strange－looking people．Their heads always turn either to right or left：one of their eyes turns in－wards，the other upwards．Their main interests are music and mathematics．They spend so much time thinking abut mathe－matical problems that they do not notice what is happening around them．In fact，rich Laputans employ a servant whose job is to follow his master everywhere The servant warns him if he is going to step into a hole，and reminds him to reply if someone speaks to him．
　　I was taken to see the King，but had to wait for at least an hour while he struggled with a difficult mathematical question．However，when he had finished，he spoke politely to me，and ordered his servants to show me to a room．For dinner they gave me three kinds of meat—a square of beef，a triangle of chicken and a circle of lamb Even the bread was cut into mathematical shapes in the evening a teacher arrived to help me learn the language，and in a few days I was able to make conversation with the island people．
　　Laputa is a circle of land，about eight kilometres across，covered with houses and other buildings．It is moved by a sim－ple machine which uses magnets to pull the island closer to land or push it higher into the sky．The island always moves slowly．It can only fly over the country called Balnibarbi，which belongs to the King of Laputa．
　　It is difficult talking to Laputans，as they have little interest in anything except music and mathematics．They are，howev－er，very worried about the future of the earth，the sun，and the stars，and they often discuss this．I heard a conversation about this shortly before I left Laputa．
　　‘How are you，my friend？’one man asked another．
　　‘As well as can be expected，’ came the reply．
　　‘And how is the sun，do you think？’
　　‘I thought he looked rather feverish this morning．I'm afraid he'll get too hot and destroy himself one day，if he goes on like this．’
　　‘I know，it's very worrying．And what about the earth？It's only thirty years until the next falling star comes this way， and the earth was very nearly destroyed by the last one！’
　　‘That's right．We know that the next falling star is almost certain to get too close to the sun，and catch fire！And when the earth passes through that fire，it'll be destroyed immedi－ately！’
　　The most interesting place I saw there was the university，which was full of very clever men，with very clever ideas．They were all working hard to find better，faster，cheaper，easier ways of doing and making things．They had ideas for building houses from the roof downwards，turning rocks into soft material，making rivers run uphill，and saving sunshine in bottles．I cannot remember half of the astonishingly clever ideas which they were working on．One day，they told me，they would find the answers to all these problems，and then their country would be the most wonderful place in the world．Meanwhile，I noticed that the people looked hungry and mis－erable．Their clothes were old and full of holes，their houses were badly built and falling down．There were no vegetables or corn growing in the fields．
　　When I visited the School of Mathematics，I could not un－derstand why the students looked so unhappy．
　　‘What's the matter，young man？’I asked one of them．‘You look quite ill．’
　　‘Yes，sir，he answered．‘You see，we've only just eaten our lessons for today，and it's made us feel rather sick．’
　　‘Eaten them？’I repeated in surprise．‘Why did you do that？’
　　‘Oh，that's the way we learn here，sir，’he replied．‘Our professors write mathematical questions and answers on paper，then we eat the paper．After that we're only supposed to have bread and water for three days，while the information moves upwards to our heads．But it's awful，sir，not eating much for three days．And we often feel sick．Er…excuse me，sir！’And he ran past me out of the room．This highly developed system of teaching did not seem to be working well．






■ 11 Glubbdubdrib and Luggnagg
　　Although the Laputans were kind to me，I did not want to spend a long time in their country．Therefore，I de-cided to travel from Balnibarbi to the island of Luggnagg，from there to Japan，and then home to England．But before I went to Luggnagg，an official I had met in Lagado persuaded me to visit the small island of Glubbdubdrib．
　　‘You'll find it a very interesting place，he told me．‘Glubbdubdrib means the island of magicians．All the impor－tant people there are good at magic，you see．The President is the best magician of them all．But I must warn you，he has some very strange servants-they're all ghosts！By using magic he can order the ghost of any dead person to be his ser－vant for twenty-four hours，and the ghost must obey．’
　　It seemed unbelievable，but it was true．When we arrived on the island，we were invited to the President's palace．His servants certainly looked strange to me there was a smell of death about them．When the President no longer needed them，he waved a hand，and they simply disappeared．
　　I visited the President every day during my stay，and soon got used to seeing the ghosts．One day the President said，‘Gulliver，would you like to call a ghost？It could be anyone from the beginning of the world up to the present day．You could ask them questions about their lives．And you can be sure they'll tell the truth— ghosts always do．
　　‘That's very kind of you，sir，I replied，and thought hard for a moment．‘First，I’d like to see Alexander the Great，please．’
　　The President pointed out of the window．There in a large field was the ghost of Alexander，with his huge army．This famous king lived long ago in Macedonia in northern Greece．His kingdom covered many countries，from Greece to Egypt，from Persia to parts of India．But he died very young，when he was only thirty－three，and no one knew why．The Presi－dent called him into the room．
　　‘Great King，’I said to him，‘just tell me one thing．Were you murdered，or did you die naturally！’
　　‘Young man，’he replied，‘nobody murdered me．I drank too much and died of a fever．’
　　So，in these few words，I had learnt one of the secrets of history！I turned to the President．‘And now，may we see Julius Caesar and Brutus？’
　　The two Romans took Alexander's place．Brutus，of course，had killed Julius Caesar in Rome on 15th March，44BC—one of the most famous murders in history．It is terrible to die by the hand of a friend．
　　‘Great Caesar，’I said，‘how do you feel about your mur-derer，Brutus？’
　　‘Do not call him that，’replied Caesar，‘He is a brave，good man，the best in Rome，and he did the right thing for Rome by killing me．In death，as in life，he has always been my friend．’
　　I cannot remember how many more ghosts I called to appear．I was very interested in their answers to my questions，which often seemed to offer a different view of his-tory from the one I had been taught at school．
　　However，it was soon time to leave Glubbdubdrib，and sail to Luggnagg，a much larger island to the south－east of Japan．The Luggnuggians are polite and generous people，and I stayed here for three months．I made many friends among them．One day，one of them asked me，‘Have you ever seen any of our Struldbrugs？’
　　‘I don't think so，’I replied．‘What's that？’
　　‘Well，a Struldbrug is a human being who will never die，but will live for ever．If a Luggnuggian baby is born with a round spot above its left eye，which never disappears，it's a Struldbrug．We have over a thousand of them in the country．’
　　‘How wonderful！’I cried．‘How exciting！How lucky you are in Luggnagg，where a child has a chance of living for ever！And how especially lucky the Struldbrugs are！Disease，disas－ter，and death can never touch them！And imagine how much we can learn from them！I expect they're among the most im－portant people in the country．They've lived through history and know so much，which they're certain to pass on to the rest of us．If I had the chance，I’d like to spend my whole life listening to the intelligent conversation of these extraordinary people，here in Luggnagg！’
　　‘That's easy，’I replied．‘First I’d work hard，and earn a lot of money．In about two hundred years I’d be the richest man in Luggnagg．I’d study too，so that I knew more about everything than the cleverest professors．I’d also write down everything important that happened over the years，so that students of history would come to me for help．I’d teach young people what I had learnt．But most of my time I’d spend with other Struldbrugs，friends of mine．Together we could help to destroy crime in the world，and begin to build a new and bet－ter life for everyone．’
　　I had only just finished describing the happiness of endless life，when I realized that my friend's shoulders were shaking and tears of laughter were running down his face．
　　‘I really must explain，’he said．‘You see，you've made a very understandable mistake．You suppose that if someone lives for ever，he is young，healthy，and strong for ever too．And that doesn't happen．Our Struldbrugs have a terrible life．After living for about eighty years，they become ill and miser－able．They have no friends and they can't remember much of the past．At that age the law considers them to be dead， so their children inherit their houses and money．Then they sometimes have to beg to get enough food to eat．They lose their teeth and hair，they forget the names of their families，and the only thing they want is to die．But that's impossible！’
　　I realized how stupid I had been，and felt very sorry for the poor Struldbrugs．
　　I finally left Luggnagg on a boat sailing to Japan．From there I found a ship which was returning to England．My voy－age to Laputa，Balnibarbi，Glubbdubdrib and Luggnagg had taken me away from home for five and a half years．






■ 12 A voyage to the country of the Houyhnhnme
　　It was not long before I started my next voyage，on 7th September，1710，as captain of my own ship this time．The owner of the ship wanted me to sail to the Indiano Ocean to do some business for him there，but I was very unlucky．On the way，I had to employ some new sailors from Barbados， but they were men of very bad character．I heard them whispering to the other sailors several times，but I did not suspect what they were planning．One morning，as we were sailing round the Cape of Good Hope，they attacked me and tied me up．They told me they were going to take control of the ship and become pirates．There was nothing I could do．They left me，alone，on the beach of a small island in the middle of the Indi－an Ocean．
　　As the ship sailed away，I realized I had no idea where I was．I found a road away from the beach，and walked very quietly and carefully along，in case I was attacked．Several strange-looking animals were lying in a field，and some were sitting in a tree．Their heads and chests were covered in hair，and they had beards as well．They walked sometimes on two，and sometimes on four legs，and could climb trees．They were certainly the ugliest animals I had ever seen in all my travels．
　　When I met one of these creatures on the road，his face showed great surprise and he lifted a foot high in the air．I did not know if he was going to attack me or not，but I hit him hard with the side of my sword．He screamed so loudly that all the other animals ran to help him．There were about forty of them around me．I kept them away by waving my sword in the air，but their wild cries frightened me，and the horrible smell from their bodies made me feel sick．
　　Suddenly they all ran away．I noticed that a horse was com－ing along the road，so I supposed the animals were afraid of him．The horse stopped when he saw me，and seemed very surprised．He neighed several times in a very intelligent，gen－tle way，and I almost wondered if he was speaking in his own language．When another horse came along，the two horses walked up and down together，while neighing to each other．They seemed like two important people discussing a difficult problem．I watched this with astonishment，and decided that if the animals in this country seemed so sensible，the human beings must be the most intelligent in the world．
　　The two horses then came close to me，looking at my face and clothes with great interest．They talked to each other a－gain，and then the first horse made clear signs for me to follow him．
　　He led me to a long，low building．Inside there were several lange airy rooms，with no furniture．Other horses were sitting or lying comfortably on the floor，on clean blankets．But where was the master of the house？Were these horses his ser－vants？I began to wonder if I was going mad．Then I realized that the house did not belong to a human，but to the horse who had brought me here．In this country，horses，not people，were in control．
　　I started learning a little of their language．Their word Houyhnhnm means a horse，and the word itself sounds very like the noise a horse makes．I found it very difficult to say this word，and so I decided to shorten it and call them Houys．Their servants were the horrible－looking animals I had seen earlier．They did all the hard work，and lived in dirty！little rooms in another building，where they were tied to the walls．To my horror，these ugly animals，called Yahoos，had human faces which looked very similar to mine．I did not want anyone to think I was a Yahoo，so I tried to make it clear that my habits were very different from theirs．At least I was allowed to sleep in a separate room from them．
　　At first I thought I would die of hunger，as I could not eat the Yahoos’dirty meat or the Houys’grass and corn．But I soon learnt how to bake little cakes made of corn，which I ate with warm milk．Sometimes I caught a bird，an cooked it，or picked leaves of plants to eat with my bread．
　　My Houy master was very interested in me，and as soon as I could speak the language，he asked me to explain where I had come from．
　　‘Well，master，’I neighed，‘I've come from a country on the other side of the world．And you may not believe this， but in my country all the important people look like Yahoos．’
　　‘But how is that possible？’he asked gently．‘Your Houys surely wouldn't allow unintelligent creatures like Yahoos to control the country．’
　　‘It may seem strange，’I agreed，‘but you see，I was sur－prised to find that in this country the Houys are the sensitive and intelligent creatures．And if I'm lucky enough to return home，I'll tell my friends all about it．But I'm afraid they may accuse me of lying．’
　　My master looked quite worried．‘What is lying？’he asked．
　　In their language there is no word which means telling lies，and my master had great difficulty in understanding me．I tried to explain．
　　‘Oh，’he answered，still unsure．‘But why does anyone tell a lie？There's no reason for doing it．We use language in this country in order to understand each other，and to give and re-ceive information．If you don't tell the truth，how can people understand each other？’
　　I began to see how different Houy life was from what I was used to．
　　‘But tell me，’he continued，‘about your country．’
　　I was delighted to describe recent English history to him，especially some of our most successful wars．
　　‘But why does one country attack another？’he asked．
　　‘There are many reasons，’I replied．‘A king or his lords may want more land．Or there may be a difference of opinion between two countries：for example，whether uniforms should be black，white，red or grey．Sometimes we fight because the enemy's too strong，sometimes because he isn't strong enough ．Sometimes our neighbours want the things we have，or have the things we want，so we both fight until they take ours or give us theirs．We often attack our best friend，if we want some of his land．There's always a war somewhere．For this reason，being a soldier is one of the best jobs you can have．’
　　‘A soldier，’repeated my master．‘I'm not quite sure what that is．’
　　‘A soldier is a Yahoo who works for his King and country．His orders are to kill as many people as he can，’I answered．
　　‘People who've never hurt him？’asked the Houy．
　　‘That's right，’I said，pleased that he seemed to under－stand at last．‘Soldiers have killed thousands of people in re－cent history．’
　　He shook his head and looked sad．‘I think you must be-what was your word？Ah yes—lying to me．How could you and your countrymen kill so many other Yahoos？And why would you want to？’
　　I smiled as I replied proudly，‘Sir，you don't know much about European war．With our guns and bullets and gunpow－der we can destroy a thousand ships，a hundred cities，and twenty thousand men You see，—’
　　‘Be quiet！’he ordered．‘I 've heard enough．I know Ya-hoos are bad，but I didn't realize they could possibly do such terrible things．’
　　After these conversations I began to wonder whether the Houys were right．Why do we humans so often fight wars and tell lies？Peace and truth began to seem more important than making war or making money．I became more and more used to the Houys’ideas and way of life．As the Houys did，I hated the Yahoos for their dirty habits and unpleasant character．By the time I had been there a year，I walked and neighed like the Houys．I felt such a strong love for them that I planned to spend the rest of my life among them，and to try to become more like them．It is a great sadness to me，even today，that this was not possible．
　　One day my Houy master said，‘Can you explain something to me？Why are the Yahoos so violently fond of those shining stones in the fields？They dig for days to get them out of the ground，and hide them jealously from other Yahoos．’
　　‘I expect they've found pieces of gold or silver，’I said．Because he did not seem to understand，I added，‘We use them as money，to pay for things，you see．’
　　‘How strange！’he replied．‘We share everything here．No Houy needs－what do you call it？-money．’
　　Perhaps you can imagine how I felt．I knew I could be hap－py for ever with these sensible，gentle creatures，who never lied or stole，in a country which had no disease，no crime，no wars．But this perfect happiness did not last long．
　　‘I'm sorry，’said my master one day．‘My friends and I have decided you can't stay here any longer．You see，you're neither one of us，nor a Yahoo．’
　　‘No！’I cried desperately．‘Don't send me away！How can I go back to England to live with those awful Yahoos！’
　　‘I'm afraid you must，’he replied gently．‘My servants will help you make a boat．’
　　And so，two months later，although I was very sad to leave，I said goodbye to my dear master and his family，and rowed away from the land of the Houys．I knew that I would never find happiness anywhere else．
　　After several days travelling eastwards，I arrived in Aus－tralia，and from there managed to find a ship returning to Eu-rope．I did not enjoy the voyage．The sailors all laughed at me because I walked and neighed like a horse．They looked just like those horrible Yahoos，and at first I could not let them touch me or come near me．Their ugly faces and unpleasant smell made me feel quite ill．
　　And when I arrived home in England，after being away for five years，my wife and children were delighted to see me，be-cause they had thought I was dead．But to my horror they looked and smelt like Yahoos too，and I told them to keep away from me．
　　Even now，five years later，I do not let my children get close to me，although I sometimes allow my wife to sit with me while I eat．I try to accept my countrymen now，but the proud ones，who are so full of their own self-importance-well，they had better not come near me．How sad that people cannot learn from the Houys！I was hoping that perhaps hu- man beings would change their ways after reading the stories of my life with the Houys．But they accuse me of lying in my book．And now I realize that people still lie，steal，and fight，just as they have always done，and probably will always do．
　　I will say no more．Clearly，there is no hope for human be-ings．I was stupid to think that I could bring reason and truth into their lives and thoughts Humans are all Yahoos，and Ya- boos they will remain．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Treasure Island by Robert Louis Stevenson





■ 1 The old seaman Squire
　　Squire Trelawney, Dr Livesey, and the others have asked me to write down all I know about Treasure Island .My name is Jim Hawkins, and I was in the story right from the start, back in 17-.I was only a boy then, and it all began at the time my father owned the Admiral Benbow inn, at Black Hill Cove .I remember so clearly the day when the old seaman came to stay-I can almost see him in front of me as I write.
　　He arrived with his sea-chest, a tall, strong man with a cut across one cheek. He sang that old sea sang as he walked up to the inn door：
　　Fifeen men on the dead man's chest-
　　Yo-ho－ho，and a bottle of rum！
　　The old seaman called for a glass of rum，and stood outside，drinking and looking around. Our inn was on me cliffs above Black Hill Cove, and was a wild ,lonely place. But the seaman seemed to like it.
　　‘Do many people come here？’ he asked.
　　‘No,’my father told him.
　　‘Then it's the place for me,’said the seaman.‘I'll stay here for a bit. You can call me Captain.’He threw down three or four gold coins.‘Tell me when I've spent all that.’
　　He was a silent man. All day he walked around the cove, or up on the cliffs ;all evening he sat in a corner of the room, and drank rum and water .He only spoke to our other customers when he was drunk. Then he told them terrible stories of his wild and criminal life at sea. Our customers were mostly quiet ,farming people; the captain frightened them and they soon learned to leave him alone.
　　Every day, he asked if any seamen had gone along the road. At first we thought he wanted friends of his own kind, but then we began to understand that there was a different reason .He told me to watch for a seaman with one leg and to let him know the moment when a man like that appeared. He promised to give me a silver coin every month for doing this .I dreamed about this one－legged seaman for many nights afterwards.
　　The captain stayed week after week, month after month. His gold coins were soon used up, but my father was a sick man and afraid to ask for more.
　　Dr Livesey came late one afternoon. After he had seen my father ,he had dinner with my mother, then stayed to smoke his pipe .I noticed the difference between the doctor with his white hair and pleasant way of speaking, and that dirty, heavy, red－faced seaman, drunk with rum.
　　The captain began to sing his song:
　　Fifteen men on the dead man's chest-
　　Yo－ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!
　　Drink and the devil had killed off the rest-
　　Yo－ho－ho and a bottle of, rum!
　　Dr Livesey did not like the song.He looked up angrily before he went on talking to old Taylor, the gardener. Others in the room took no notice of the song. The captain beat the table with his hand for silence. The voices in the room died away, all except Dr Livesey's．The doctor continued to speak.
　　The captain swore softly, then said,‘ Silence!’
　　‘Are you speaking to me ,sir
’asked the doctor.
　　‘Yes,’the captain told him, swearing again.
　　‘I have only one thing to say to you, sir,’ replied the doctor.‘If you keep on drinking rum ,the world will soon be free of a dirty scoundrel!’
　　The captain jumped to his feet with a knife in his hand ,but the doctor never moved .He spoke to the captain in a calm and clear voice so that others in the room could hear:
　　‘If you don't put that knife away, I promise you shall die a criminal's death under the law.’
　　Then followed a battle of looks between them, but the cap－tain soon put away his weapon and sat down like a beaten dog. Soon after Dr Livesey rode away on his horse. The captain was silent for the rest of the evening, and for many evenings after－wards.






■ 2 Black Dog
　　One January morning ,the captain got up early and walked down to the beach. It was a cold winter's day with the sun still low in the sky. My mother was upstairs with my father, who was now very ill. That year the winter was long and hard ,and we knew my father would not see another spring.
　　I was getting the table ready for the captain's breakfast. Suddenly, the door of the inn opened and a man stepped inside. I had never seen him before. He wore a sailor's short sword by his side ,and I noticed he had only three fingers on his left hand.
　　I asked him what he wanted and he said,‘ I'll take a glass of rum.’But before I could fetch it ,he told me to come near him.‘Is this table for my old friend Bill
’the stranger asked, with a terrible smile.
　　I told him I did not know his friend Bill and the breakfast was for a man who was staying at the inn.‘We call him the captain,’I said.
　　‘Does he have a sword cut on his face
’he asked.
　　‘Yes,’I said.
　　‘That's Bill,’said the stranger.‘Is he here
’
　　I told him the captain was out walking, and the man waited ,like a cat waiting for a mouse. I did not like the look on his face and was sure the captain would not be pleased to see him.
　　When the captain came back ,the man pulled me behind the door. The captain opened the door and walked across the room.
　　‘Bill,’said the stranger.
　　The captain turned quickly and saw us. The colour went from his face and be looked old and sick.‘Black Dog!’he said. He stared at the stranger.‘And what do you want
’
　　‘I'll have a glass of rum,’ said Black Dog, ‘then you and I'll sit and talk like old friends.’
　　I fetched the rum and they told me to go away. I went out of the room ,but the voices became louder.
　　‘No, no, and that's an end of it!I heard the captain shout. ‘If one is caught ,we'll all be caught!’
　　There were more shouts, and then the sound of the table crashing over. Next, I heard the sound of swords, then out ran Black Dog with blood running down his shoulder .He ran out of the inn and along the road. In a few seconds ,he had disap－peared from sight.
　　The captain watched him go ,then said,‘Jim, quick! Bring me rum.
　　He turned and went back into the inn, but he could only just stand on his feet. I realized he was feeling ill and ran to fetch the rum. Then I heard him falling and hurried back to find him on the floor.
　　My mother heard the noise and came downstairs .We lifted the captain's head. His eyes were closed and his face was a ter－ rible colour.
　　At that moment Dr Livesey arrived to see my father .He looked at the captain and said to my mother:‘ His heart can't take much more of this .I told him drinking rum would kill him ,and it nearly has.’
　　The captain opened his eyes and tried to sit up.‘Where's Black Dog
’he asked.
　　‘There's no Black Dog here,’ said the doctor, ‘Get on your feet and I'll help you to your bed.’






■ 3 The black spot
　　Later that day, I took the captain a cool drink.
　　‘Jim, ’he said,‘you're the only person here worth anything .You'll bring me some rum ,won't you, boy
’
　　‘The doctor said—’I began.
　　He swore about the doctor.‘Look, Jim, one glass is all I ask. I'll pay you for it.’
　　‘The only money I want, ’I said,‘is the money you owe my father .But I'll get you one glass of rum ,no more.’
　　He was grateful and drank it quickly.‘Did the doctor say how long I must lie in my bed
’he asked.
　　‘A week,’I told him.
　　‘A week!’he cried.‘I can't do that .They'll have the black spot on me by then. They'll come for me.’
　　‘Who will
 Black Dog
’I said.
　　‘Yes, but there's worse than him. It's my old sea－chest they want, but I'll show them! Jim, if I get the black spot, you go to that doctor. Tell him to bring a crowd of law officers and a local judge to the inn. They can catch Flint's crew-all that are left-at the Admiral Benbow .I was Flint's first ship's officer, and I'm the only one who knows the place. He told me when he was dying. But don't call the law unless they give me the black spot, or if you see the seaman with one leg-he's worse than any of them.’
　　‘But what is the black spot, captain
’I asked.
　　‘That's a message, boy. I'll tell you if they give me that. Keep your eyes open, Jim, and I'll give you half of everything I have.’He talked for a little longer then fell into a heavy sleep ,and I left him.
　　That night, my father died. This put all other thoughts to one side and I had no time to worry about the captain.
　　The next morning, the captain came downstairs. He didn't eat much food but he drank more rum than usual. He helped himself and we were too busy to stop him. There were visits from neighbours, and my father's burial to arrange.
　　The day after the burial was cold and foggy .At about three o’clock in the afternoon, I was standing at the door of the inn when I saw a blind man coming along the road. He was feeling his way with a stick.
　　‘Will any kind friend tell a poor blind man where he is
’he said.
　　‘You're at the Admiral Benbow inn, Black Hill Cove, my good man,’I said.
　　‘I hear a young voice,’ he said. Will you give me your hand, my kind young friend ,and take me inside
’
　　I held out my hand, and the terrible, soft-speaking ,eyeless man took hold of it like a dog biting a bone .He pulled me vio－lently towards him.
　　‘Now ,boy,’he said,‘take me to the captain or I'll break your arm! ’And I had never heard a voice so cruel and cold.
　　I was so frightened by the blind man's violence that I obeyed him without question, and took, him into the room where the sick captain was sitting. He saw the blind man and a look of fear passed across his face.
　　‘Sit where you are, Bill,’ said the blind man.‘I can't see, but I can hear a finger move .Hold out your right hand.’
　　I watched him put something in the captain's hand.‘And now that's done, ’said the blind man, and he quickly went out of the inn. I heard his stick tap－tap－tapping away along the road.
　　The captain opened his hand and looked into it.‘Ten o’clock!’he cried ,and jumped up. He put his hand round his neck, made a strange sound, and fell face down on to the floor.
　　I ran to him, calling to my mother .But the captain was dead.






■ 4 The sea-chest
　　On the floor close to the captain's hand was a little round piece of paper, blackened on one side. I had no doubt that this was the black spot .On the other side was some writ－ ing: You have till ten o’clock tonight. Our old clock reminded me it was now six.
　　Quickly, I told my mother everything, and we decided to run to the village to hide, before the blind man and his friends re-turned.
　　‘But first,’my mother said bravely, ‘we have to get the key to the sea-chest. Why shouldn't we take the money the captain owes us
 His friends certainly won’ t give it to us!’
　　The key was around his neck on a piece of string. I cut the string, and we hurried up to his room where the chest had stood since the day he came. There was a letter ‘B’ painted on the top of it. Inside were two very fine pistols, some silver, pipe-tobacco ,and an old clock. Underneath these things were some papers tied up inside a cloth, and a bag of gold coins.
　　‘I'll show these scoundrels I'm an honest woman,’said my mother.‘I'll take what I'm owed and no more.’She began counting the money .There were all kinds of gold coins in the bag-big French gold coins, Spanish doubloons and pieces of eight. It was slow work to find the English gold guineas that we needed.
　　We were half-way through when I heard a sound that filled my heart with fear ;the tap-tapping of the blind man's stick on the frozen road. Then it knocked against the inn door and we did not breathe .But then the tapping started again and slowly died away.
　　‘Mother,’I said,‘take it all, and let's go before the blind man comes back with his friends.’
　　But my mother went on counting until we heard a low shout coming from the hill outside.‘I'll take what I have,’ she said, jumping to her feet.
　　‘And I'll take this for what I'm owed, ’I said, and picked up the cloth of papers.
　　We ran from the inn and along the road to the village. It was dark but there was a full moon .We heard running feet coming towards us.
　　‘Take the money and run on,’ my mother said breathlessly. But I refused to leave her. Quickly, I pulled her off the road and down under a small bridge .There we hid ,trembling.
　　Not a moment too soon .Seven or eight men were running past us. Three men ran in front, and I saw that the one in the middle was the blind man. Silently, I climbed back up to the road and lay in the long grass to watch what happened.
　　‘Down with the door!’the blind man shouted.
　　Four or five of them broke down the door of the Admiral Benbow and ran inside. There was a shout:‘ Bill's dead!’
　　The blind man swore at them.‘Look upstairs and find the chest!’he cried.
　　I could hear their feet on the stairs ,then a voice shouting down to the blind man in the road outside:‘Pew! They've been here before us. The money's here but Flint's papers have gone!’
　　‘It's those people of the inn-it's that boy!’shouted the blind man Pew.‘Search and find’em.’
　　Just then there came the sound of horses and riders thunder－ing along the road. It was heard by the men in the inn, and in a second they were out in the road, running into the darkness of the fields. They did not wait for blind Pew, who tried to follow them, tapping wildly with his stick.‘Johnny, Black Dog! You won't leave your old friend Pew, boys－not old Pew!’
　　He was still in the middle of the road when the horses thun－dered up to the inn. Pew turned with a scream, but he turned the wrong way ,and ran straight into the first of the horses .The rider tried to save him, but failed. Down went Pew, under the horse's feet, with a cry that rang high into the night .It was all over in seconds ,and Pew didn't move again.
　　I jumped up and shouted to the riders. One of the men was Captain Dance, the law officer from the nearby town. He had head reports of a pirate ship in Black Hill Cove and had come looking for the pirates. I told him my story, and he and his men chased the pirates down into the cove. But by the time they got to the beach, the ship was already out to sea.
　　‘Well,’ said Captain Dance when he returned, ‘at least we finished off Pew.’
　　We took my mother to a house in the villag, then went back to the Admiral Benbow. Inside, everything was smashed and broken.
　　‘What were they looking for Hawkins
’asked Mr Dance.
　　‘They got the money from the chest,’I said,‘ but I think I have what they wanted most. I'd like to get it to a safe place. I thought, perhaps, Dr Livesey…’
　　‘Quite right,’ said Mr Dance. ‘He's the local judge, and I ought to report Pew's death to him or Squire Trelawney. I'll take you with me to his house.’
　　Dr Livesey was not at his house but with the squire at his home ,so Captain Dance and I went on there.
　　I had never seen Squire Trelawney so near .He was a big tall man, with a red face, and was sitting beside a fire with Dr Livesey.‘Come in, Mr Dance,’he said.
　　Mr Dance gave his report and both men listened with deep interest.
　　‘And so, Jim,’ said the doctor,‘you have the thing that they were looking for, have you
’
　　‘Here it is, sir, I said, and gave him the papers tied inside the cloth. The doctor looked at them and put them quietly in the pocket of his coat. After that, Mr Dance went away and I was given some food.
　　‘And now ,squire ,said the doctor,‘you have heard of this Flint,I suppose
’
　　‘Heard of him!’ cried the squire. ‘He was the worst pirate that ever sailed. The Spanish used to tremble just to hear his name!’
　　‘Well ,I've heard of him myself,’said Dr Livesey.‘But the question is, did he have money
’
　　‘Money!’said the squire.‘Of course Flint had money! Those scoundrels were after it.’
　　‘Well then, suppose I have here in my pocket a paper that shows where Flint hid his treasure,’ said the doctor.‘Would the treasure be worth looking for
’
　　‘Worth looking for!’ cried the squire, with great enthusiasm. I'll tell you what it's worth. I'll prepare a ship at Bristol ,take you and Hawkins with me, and have that trea－sure if I have to search for a year!’
　　We opened the cloth and found two things-a book and a paper .The book gave a list of all the money Flint had stolen from different ships during twenty years at sea. The doctor opened the paper and found a map of an island. There was a hill in the centre marked Spyglass, and several names that had been added later. There were three big black crosses—two in the north of the island and one in the south－west. Beside the last cross were the words: Most of the treasure here. On the back of the paper, the same person had written:
　　Tall tree. Spyglass shoulder, to the North of North－
　　North-East.
　　Skeleton Island East-South－East and by East.
　　The squire and Dr Llvesey were delighted.
　　‘Tomorrow I start for Bristol,’ said Squire Trelawney.‘In three weeks we will have the best ship ir,and the finest crew in England. Hawkins can come as cabin－boy. You, Livesey, are the ship's doctor. I am admiral. We'll take three of my men ,Redruth, Joyce ,and Hunter.’
　　‘Trelawney,’said the doctor,‘I'll go with you. So ,I am sure, will Hawkins. There's only one man I'm afraid of.’
　　‘And who's that
’cried the squire.‘Name the scoundrel!’
　　‘You,’said the doctor,‘because you cannot keep silent. We aren't the only men who know of this paper. Those who broke into the inn tonight want to find the same treasure .We must none of us go alone until we get to sea. You'll take Joyce and Hunter to Bristol. Meanwhile ,Jim and I will stay together .And not one of us must say a word about what we have found.’
　　‘Livesey, replied the squire,‘you're always right. I'll be as silent as a dead man.’






■ 5 I go to Bristol
　　Dr Livesey went to London, to find another doctor to look after his patients while he was away. I waited at his home with Tom Redruth. Weeks passed, and I spent many hours studying Flint's map and dreaming of treasure .Then a letter arrived, addressed to Dr Livesey‘or Jim Hawkins ,if the doctor is away’:
　　Old Anchor lnn, Bristol
　　1st March 17-
　　Dear Livesey,
　　I do not know whether you are at home or in London, so Iam sending copies of this letter to both places.
　　The ship is bought and ready for sea. You never saw a bet－ter ship——and with the name Hispaniola .I got her through my old friend, Blandly, who, with everyone in Bristol, worked hard to find me a suitable ship when they heard the reason for our voyage－treasure ,I mean.
　　‘Dr Livesey won't like that ,I said to Tom Redruth.‘The squire's been talking. ’I read on:
　　I wanted a crew of twenty men——as we may meet pirates or enemy ships——but I had the greatest difficulty finding six.Then good fortune brought me the very man that I needed .I met the man quite by accident ,and we began a conversation ,I learnt he was an old seaman who kept an inn, and he knew all the seamen in Bristol. The poor man had lost his health on shore and wanted to get work as a cook ,and go to sea again.
　　I felt sorry for him and employed him immediately, to be the ship's cook. Long John Silver ,he is called ,and he has lost a leg fighting for his country. Well, sir ,I thought I had only found a cook, but it was a crew I had discovered! Between Silver and myself, we got together a crew of the toughest seamen you can imagine.
　　I am in wonderful health, but I shall not enjoy a moment un－til my ship goes to sea. So come quickly ,Livesey , do not lose an hour !And let young Hawkins go at once to say goodbye to his mother, and then come quickly to Bristol with Redruth.
　　John Trelawney
　　PS: Blandly found us an excellent man to be captain, and Sil－ver found a man called Arrow to be first officer.
　　Next day,I went to the Admiral Benbow and said goodbye to my mother .I was sad to leave ,but when Redruth and I began our journey to Bristol ,my thoughts turned to the voyage and the search for treasure.
　　Mr Trelawney was waiting for us at an inn, near the sea.‘Here you are!’he cried when we arrived.‘The doctor came from London last night ,so now the ship's company is complete. We sail tomorrow!’
　　After I had finished breakfast ,the squire gave me a note to take to Long John Silver at the Spyglass Inn.
　　It was a bright little place where the customers were mostly seamen. As I entered ,a man came out of a side room and I knew immediately he must be Long John. His left leg was cut off above the knee and he walked with a crutch under his left shoulder .He was tall and strong with a big ,smiling face.
　　Now ,when I read about Long John in Squire Trelawney's letter, I had been afraid he might be the one-legged seamanthat old Bill had talked about .But one look at the man in front of me was enough. I knew old Bill, and Black Dog, and the blind man Pew .I thought I knew what a pirate looked like-a very different person from this clean and smiling man.
　　‘Mr Silver ,sir
’I asked, holding out the note.
　　‘Yes ,my boy,’he said.‘That's my name .And who are you
’And then he saw the squire's letter and looked surprised.‘Oh!’he said loudly. ‘I see you're our new cabin－boy. I'm pleased to meet you.’
　　Just then, a customer got up suddenly and hurried to the door. I recognized him as the man with only three fingers on his left hand—the one who had come to the Admiral Benbow!
　　‘Stop him!’I shouted.‘It's Black Dog!’
　　‘ I don't care who he is,’said Silver.‘He hasn't paid for his drinks. Run and catch him, Harry!’
　　A man jumped up and ran after Black Dog.
　　‘What was his name
’asked Silver.‘Black what
’
　　‘Dog, sir,’I said.‘Hasn't Mr Trelawney told you about the pirates
 He was one of them.’
　　‘A pirate! I didn't know that,’said Silver.‘I've seen him before, when he came with a blind man.’
　　‘That was blind Pew, another pirate,’I said.
　　‘That was his name!’ said Silver.
　　I watched the sea cook carefully .But when the man Harry came back without the pirate, Silver seemed angry and I be-lieved he was.
　　‘I'll come with you to tell Mr Trelawney what's happened,’he said. This is a serious matter.’
　　As we walked back, Silver told me many interesting things about the ships that we passed. I began to think he was going to be a good companion to have when we were at sea.
　　When we got to the inn, the squire and Dr Livesey were there .Long John told them about Black Dog, saying,‘That was how it was, wasn't it, Hawkins
’And I had to agree. We were all sorry about Black Dog getting away, but there was nothing we could do.
　　‘All the crew must be on board by four o’clock this after－ noon, Trelawney told Long John.
　　‘Right ,sir!’said the sea cook, and he left us to return to his inn.
　　‘Trelawney,’said Dr Livesey,‘I don't always think you find the best men, but I'll say this: John Silver seems a good man .Now, let's go and see the ship!’






■ 6 The ship and its men
　　We went out to the His paniola in a small boat. Mr Ar－row met us, and it was clear that he and the squire were very friendly .But things were not the same between Mr Trelawney and the captain. Captain Smollett seemed angry with everybody on board, and told us why.
　　‘I don't like this voyage,’he told us.‘I don't like the men, and I don't like my first officer.’
　　‘Perhaps ,sir ,you don't like the ship
’said the squire ,an－grily.
　　‘I can't say that ,sir ,as I haven't yet sailed her, replied the captain.‘She seems a good ship.’
　　‘Possibly, sir, you don't like your employer either
 said the squire.
　　‘Now, now, let's not argue,’ said Dr Livesey. He turned to the captain.‘You say you don't like this voyage,’ he said.‘Please explain.’
　　‘I was employed, sir,’said the captain,‘on secret orders ,and to sail this ship where that gentleman ordered me to sail it. Now I find every other man on this ship knows more than I do .I don't call that fair, do you
’
　　‘No,’said Dr Livesey, ‘I don't.’
　　‘Next,’said the captain, I learn we are going to look for treasure－hear it from my own crew! Now, I don't like trea－sure voyages at the best of times, and I certainly don't like them when they are secret. Also, a captain is usually allowed to choose his own crew.’
　　‘That's true, ’agreed the doctor.‘And you don't like Mr Arrow
’
　　‘No, sir, ’replied Captain Smollett.‘He's too friendly with the crew.’
　　‘Tell us what you want, ’said the doctor.
　　‘First of all, the men are putting the powder and weapons in the front of the ship,’said the captain.‘Now, you have a good place under the cabin .Why not put them there 
Second, you are bringing four of your own people. Let them sleep here be－ side the cabin.’
　　‘What else
’asked Mr Trelawney.
　　‘Only one thing, sir, ’said the captain.‘There's been too much talking already. I'll tell you what I've heard. That you have a map of an island; that there's crosses on the map to show where treasure is; and that the island is-’Then he told us the exact place.
　　‘I never told that to anyone!’cried the squire.
　　‘The crew know it, sir,’replied the captain.‘I don't know who has this map, but I want it to be kept secret ,even from me and Mr Arrow. If not ,I will ask you to let me leave the ship.’
　　‘You want us to keep all this a secret,’said the doctor,‘and you want all the weapons and powder to be kept near us. In other words ,you fear a mutiny.’
　　‘I did not say that ,sir,’replied Captain Smoll ett.‘No cap－tain could go to sea believing that.’And he went away.
　　‘ Trelawney, said the doctor, I believe you have managed to get two honest men on board-that man ,and John Silver.’
　　‘Silver, yes,’ said the squire, ‘but the captain acts neither like a man, nor a good seaman!’
　　‘Well,’ said the doctor,‘ we shall see.’
　　We were moving the weapons and powder when Long John came aboard. The cook came up the side as quick as a monkey and saw what we were doing.
　　‘What's this
’he wanted to know.
　　‘My orders,’said the captain, coldly.‘You may go below, my man .The crew will want supper.’
　　‘Yes ,sir,’said the cook, and disappeared quickly.
　　‘That's a good man, captain,’said the doctor.
　　‘That may be ,sir ,replied Captain Smollett.






■ 7 The apple barrel
　　We sailed at the first light of day. I was more tired than ever before, but everything was so new and interest-ing I would not leave the deck.
　　‘let's have a song!’cried one of the men.
　　Long John began to sing that song I knew so well:
　　Fifteen men on the dead man's chest—
　　And the whole crew joined with him:
　　Yo－ho－ho and a bottle of rum!
　　Even at that exciting moment, I remembered the old Admi－ral Benbow ,and I seemed to hear the voice of old Bill, thr sea－man, singing with them. But soon the sails began to fill with wind, and the land and other ships moved past on each side. The Hispaniola had begun her voyage to Treasure Island.
　　I am not going to describe the voyage in detail. The ship was indeed a good ship ,the crew were good seamen ,and the captain knew his business well. But Mr Arrow was even worse than the captain had feared. The men did as they pleased with him ,and after a day or two at sea, he began to drink too much. Where he got the drink was a mystery, and if we asked him, he would only laugh. Then one wild, dark night with a rough sea, he disappeared and was seen no more.
　　‘Fallen overboard!’said the captain.‘Gentlemen, we'll do better without him.’
　　But we were without a first officer. Mr Trelawney had been to sea before and knew enough to be useful, and one of the men, Israel Hands, was a careful and experienced seaman who was able to help with almost anything. He was a great friend of Long John Silver.
　　All the crew liked and even obeyed Silver, and he was always pleased to see me in the kitchen, which he kept as clean as a new pin. He kept his parrot in cage ,in the corner.
　　‘ I call him Captain Flint,’he told me,‘after the famous pi－rate.’
　　And the parrot used to scream,‘Pieces of eight !Pieces of eight! Pieces of eight!’
　　The captain and Mr Trelawney still did not like each other, and the squire didn't try to hide it. The captain spoke few words, but agreed that the crew were better than he'd hoprd for ,and that the ship was a fine one.
　　The crew seemed happy, which was not really surprising. No ship's company was ever so well looked after ,with plenty to eat and drink; and a barrel of apples open for any man to take one.
　　And it was the apple barrel that saved our lives.
　　It was the day before we expected to see Treasure Island. The sun had gone down ,all my work was done, and I thought I should like an apple. The barrel was nearly empty and I had to climb right inside to get my apple. As I sat there in the dark, the ship moving gently in the water, I almost fell asleep.
　　Suddenly ,the barrel shook as a heavy man sat down and rested his shoulders against it. The man began to speak and it was Silver's voice. Before I had heard a dozen words, I was trembling with fear .I understood from those words that the lives of all honest men on the ship depended on me alone!
　　‘Flint was captain ot me,’said Silver.‘In the same battle that I lost my leg, old Pew lost his sight .But I got two thou－sand when I sailed with Flint——and it's all safe in the bank at home.’
　　‘But what if you don't live to get home again
’asked an－other, doubtful voice. I recognized the voice of the youngest seaman aboard.
　　‘Pirates live rough,’agreed Silver.‘They live dangerously and some get caught and die by the law .But they eat and drink the best, and when the voyage is done, it's hundreds of pounds instead of hundreds ofPence in their pockets. Once I'm back from this trip ,I'll live like a gentleman .But I began life like you—a clever young seaman without a penny in my pocket!’
　　‘I didn't like this job until this talk woth you, John,’said the young seaman,‘but I'm with you now.’
　　They shook hands so hard that the barrel shook as well, with me inside it.By this time, I understood that Silver had just turned an honest seaman into a pirate.Perhaps every man in the crew was now a pirate!
　　Silver gave a quiet call and a third man came and sat down with them.‘Dick's with us,’said Silver.
　　‘I knew Dick was all right,’ replied the voice of Israel Hands.‘But how long are we going to wait
 I've had enoughof Captain Smollett.’
　　‘Until the last moment!’cried Silver.‘Captain Smollett's a first－class seaman, and the squire and doctor have the map. Let them find the treasure and bring it aboard—then we'll see. I'd rather have Captain Smollett sail us half-way home before I moved, but I know the rest of the men won't wait that long So I'll finish with the captain and the others at the island.’
　　‘But what do we do with them
’ asked Dick.
　　‘They must die, said Silver.‘We don't want them coming home later, to tell what happened Now, Dick ,get me an apple .I'm thirsty.’
　　You can imagine my horror! I heard Dick begin to rise ,but Hands said,‘Oh, let's have some rum ,John.’
　　Silver sent Dick to fetch the rum, then Israel said something to the cook in a low voice, and I heard only a word or two .But they were important words:‘Not another man will join.’So there were still some honest men on board.
　　I looked up and saw the moon had risen. At the same time ,the voice of one of the crew shouted:‘ Land!’
　　There was the sound of many feet running across the deck. I quickly got out of the barrel and was in time to join Hunter and Dr Livesey and the rest, at the side of the ship.
　　Away to the south-west,we saw two hills. Rising behind one of them was a third hill, even higher ,and with its top still hid-den in fog. Captain Smollett gave orders ,and the Hispaniola turned so that the ship would sail just clear of the island on the east.
　　‘Has anyone seen that land before
’he said.
　　‘I have, sir,’said Silver.‘I was cook on a ship that stopped here once. There's a safe place to anchor in the south, behind a little island called Skeleton Island. Those three hills we can see are on the big island. They're in a row running south-the biggest is called Spyglass.’
　　‘Thank you,’said Captain Smollett.‘Later on ,I'll ask you to give us some help.You may go now.’
　　Dr Livesey called me ,meaning to ask me to fetch his pipe ,but I spoke quickly.‘Doctor, get the captain and squire down to the cabin. I have some terrible news.’
　　He went across and spoke to the other two, then the three of them went below. Soon after ,a message came that I was want－ed in the cabin.
　　I told them in as few words as possible what Sliver and the others had said, and they listened without speaking. It was a warm night and I saw the moon shining on the sea as I told my story.
　　‘Captain, said the squire when I'd finished,‘ you were right,and I was wrong.’
　　‘But I've never known a crew planning to mutiny that did not show some sign of it before.’ said the captain.
　　‘That's Silver,’said the doctor.‘He's a very clever man.’
　　‘He'd look very clever with a rope around his neck, sir!’replied the captain.‘But we must make a plan .We can't go back, or they would know at once. But we have some time be－fore the treasure is found, and there are some honest men a－mong the crew. Your men, squire
’
　　‘As honest as myself,’agreed Mr Trelawney.
　　‘And ourselves, ’said the captain.‘That's seven, with young Hawkins here .Now, what other honest men are there
’
　　‘Probably the men Trelawney chose before he met Silver,’said the doctor.
　　‘No,’said the squire.‘Hands was one of them.’
　　‘Well, gentlemen,’ said the captain.‘We must wait and watch carefully ,until we know our men.’






■ 8 Treasure Island
　　Next morning, there was no wind and we were half a mile from the eastern coast of the island．Although the sun shone bright and hot, I hated the thought of Treasure Is－land ,afraid of what would happen there.
　　Because there was no wind, the small boats pulled the ship three or four miles round the island, to a safe place to drop the anchor .I went in one of them.
　　It was hard work pulling the ship, and the men argued. Af-terwards, they sat around the deck, and the smallest order was received with an angry look.
　　‘If I give another order,’said the captain,‘the whole crew will mutiny. Only one man can help us.’
　　‘And who is that
’asked the squire.
　　‘Silver,’replied the captain.‘He wants to keep things calm as much as we do;he wants the men to wait. Let's allow them an afternoon on shore. If they all go, we'll have the ship. If some go, Silver will bring them back as gentle as sheep.’
　　Guns were given to all the honest men. Hunter ,Joyce, and Redruth were told what was happening, and were less sur－prised than we expected them to be. Then the captain went on deck to talk to the crew.
　　‘Men ,you've had a hot ,tiring day,’he said.‘The boats are still in the water. Any man who wants to can go ashore for the afternoon.You'll hear a gun half an hour before the sun goes down to call you back.’
　　They all became happier at once .I think they thought they would find the treasure lying around on the beach! After some talk, six men stayed on board ,and the others, with Silver, got into the small boats.
　　I then had the first of the mad ideas that helped to save our lives. If six men were left, we could not take control of the ship ;and because only six were left, the captain's men did not need my help. So I quickly went over the ship's side and into the nearest boat.
　　No one took much notice of me, only one man saying,‘Is that you ,Jim
’But Silver called from the other boat, wanting to know if it was me. Then I began to worry if I had done the right thing.
　　The crews rowed to the beach and our boat arrived first. I ran towards the trees .Silver and the rest were a hundred me－tres behind ,and I heard him shouting,‘Jim ,Jim!’But I took no notice, pushing through trees and bushes, and ran until I could run no longer.
　　I was pleased to lose Long John and began to enjoy looking around this strange island. I crossed wet ground and came to a long,open piece of sand, then went on to a place where the trees had branches that were thick and close to the sand.
　　Just then I heard distant voices, Sliver's among them, and hid behind a tree. Through the leaves, I saw Long John Silver and another of the crew talking together.
　　‘I'm warning you because I'm your friend, Tom, Silver was saying.
　　‘Silver,’said Tom.‘You're old and you're honest, or so men say; and you've money, too, which lots of poor seamen haven't. And you're brave. Why let yourself be led away with that kind of scoundrel
 I'd rather die than-’
　　Suddenly ,there was a noise of distant shouting, then a long horrible scream .I had found one honest man here, and that ter－rible, distant scream told me of another.
　　‘John!’said Tom.‘What was that
’
　　‘That
’replied Silver. His eyes shone like pieces of broken glass in the sun.‘That'll be Alan.’
　　‘Alan!’cried poor Tom.‘An honest and true seaman !John Silver, you've been a friend of mine, but for no longer .You've killed Alan, have you
 Then kill me, too,if you can!’
　　The brave man turned his back on Silver and began to walk back to the beach .With a shout ,Silver threw his crutch through the air. It hit poor Tom between the shoulders, and he fell to the ground with a cry. Silver, as quick as a monkey ,was on top of him in a moment. Twice he dug his knife into that poor body.
　　As I watched, the whole world seemed to swim away before me in a mist-Silver, the birds above, the tall Spyglass hill. When I was myself again, Silver was standing with his crutchunder his arm, cleaning the blood from his knife with some grass.
　　As silently as I could, I began to move away ,and as soon as was clear of the trees, began to run as I had never run before.






■ 9 The man of the island
　　But almost immediately I ran into a new danger.As I ran, I heard some small stones falling from the side of a steep hill. I stopped to look round, and saw a figure jump quickly behind a tree.Frightened, I turned back towards the boats, but the figure appeared again and moved with the speedof an animal. But it was a man, I knew that now.
　　I remembered I had a pistol if I needed it, and turned back towards this man of the island. He was hiding behind another tree but stepped out to meet me.
　　‘Who are you 
I asked, staring at him.
　　‘Ben Gunn ,’he answered, and his voice sounded rough andstrange .His skin was burnt nearly black by the sun and his clothes were made from pieces of a ship's sail.‘Poor Ben Gunn,’he went on.‘Alone for three years.’
　　‘Were you shipwrecked
’I asked.
　　‘No ,my friend,’he said.‘Marooned.’
　　I had heard the word before, and knew it meant a cruel pun－ishment often used by pirates－leaving a man alone on some distant, empty island.
　　‘Marooned three years, he continued,‘ living on wild goats and fish. But I'm desperate for real English food. You don't have a piece of cheese, do you
 Many nights I've dreamed of cheese.’
　　‘If I can get on board ship again, ’I said, ‘you can have as much cheese as you want.’
　　‘Who's going to prevent you
’he said.‘And tell me your name.
　　‘Jim,’I told him.
　　‘Well, Jim,’he said, looking around and lowering his voice to a whisper, ‘I'm rich.’I was now sure the poor man was crazy ,but he repeated his words.‘Rich, I say! Now ,Jim ,that isn't Flint's ship, is it
’
　　I began to think that I had found a friend, and I answered him at once.‘It's not Flint's ship. Flint is dead, but there are some of Flint's men aboard, and that's bad news for us.’
　　‘A man with one leg
’he asked, fear in his voice.
　　‘Silver
’I asked.
　　‘Yes ,Silver,’he said,‘that was his name.’
　　‘He's the cook, and their leader ,too.’ And I told him the whole story of our voyage, and the danger we were now in.
　　‘You're in trouble, Jim,’he said when I'd finished.‘Well, Ben Gunn will help you. Will your squire be generous if I do, do you think
 I don't want him to give me a job, but will he give me one thousand pounds out of money that's really mine
’
　　‘I'm sure he will,’I said.
　　‘And take me home on your ship
’
　　‘If we can escape from the others,’I told him,‘we'll need your help to get the ship home.’
　　He seemed happy with this．‘I was in Flint's ship when he and six seamen hid the treasure，’he said．‘They were on shore nearly a week，then Flint came back alone．Not a man on board could guess how he had killed the others．Then I was in another ship，three years ago，and we saw this island．“Boys，”I said，“let's go ashore and find Flint's treasure．”Twelve days we searched，and the men got angrier with me every day．Then they went back to the ship．“Ben Gunn，”they said，“you can stay here and find Flint's money．Here's a gun，a spade and an axe．”Well，Jim，I've been here for three years，and no real food from that day to this．But I've found things to do，oh yes！’Here he closed one eye and smiled at me．‘Now go to your squire and tell him Ben Gunn is a good man．
　　‘I will，’I said，‘but how will I get on board？’
　　‘There's my boat that I made with my two hands，’he said．‘I keep her under the white rock．We might try that after dark．’
　　Although there was another hour before the sun went down，we suddenly heard the sound of the ship's gun．
　　‘They've begun to fight！’I cried．‘Follow me．’






■ 10 Inside the stockade
　　We followed the noise of the fighting and came to a hill．There stood a strong wooden house，big enough for forty people，and with holes for guns on every side．All around the house was a wide open piece of land；and around that was a fence，two metres high，with no doors or openings，and too strong to pull down easily．
　　As soon as Ben Gunn saw the English flag flying over thehouse，he said，‘There are your friends．’
　　‘More likely to be the pirates，’I answered．
　　‘Silver would put up the pirate's flag，the Jolly Roger，’said Ben．‘No，there's been a fight，and your friends have won．They're inside the stockade that Flint made years ago．’
　　‘Then I must hurry and join them，’I said．
　　He wouldn't come with me．‘I won't come until you've seen your gentleman and got his promise．You know where to find me，Jim．And if the pirates sleep on shore tonight，one of them might have an unpleasant surprise！’
　　The ship's gun BOOMED！and the shot fell only a hundredmetres away．Ben Gunn and I each ran our different ways．Thefiring continued for another hour，and I moved quietly through the trees to the shore．There I saw the Hispaniola in the bay—but the Jolly Roger was flying over her！
　　On the beach，the pirates were breaking up the captain's little boat with axes．When the ship's gun stopped firing，I went back to the stockade．
　　‘Doctor！’I shouted．‘Squire！Captain！Hello，Hunter，is that you？’
　　Dr Livesey came out of the house in time to see me climbing into the stockade，and my friends welcomed me happily They gave me supper----although they were worried because there was little food left．As I ate，Dr Livesey told me their story．
　　We heard you had gone ashore on one of the boats，Jim，’he said．‘We never doubted your honesty，but we were afraid you wouldn't be safe．Hunter and I came ashore to see what was happening，and found the stockade．It seemed a good place to defend ourselves against Silver and his men，because we were sure they would kill us when they returned to the ship Here，all we needed was enough food，and people to watch for enemies．You see，we know that if the Hispaniola does not return to Bristol by the end of August，a rescue ship will be sent to look for us．
　　‘So we made a plan to get ourselves off the ship，’Dr Livesey went on．‘Hunter，Redruth，and Joyce helped us．Hunter brought the captain's little boat round under the cabin window，and Joyce and I put guns and food and my medicine chest in it．Redruth took four guns and went on deck with Trelawney and the captain They were able to surprise Israel Hands and the other men，and they managed to persuade one man，Abraham Gray，to join us again．’
　　‘So you left five pirates on the ship？’I said．
　　‘Yes，’said Dr Livesey．‘And we dropped the rest of the weapons over the side into the sea before leaving the ship．But we forgot the ship's gun．We were half-way to the island when the pirates fired it at us．’
　　‘ I heard it，’I told him．
　　‘Trelawney tried to shoot Hands but killed another man instead，’said Dr Livesey．‘The pirates on the island heard the gun and ran out of the trees towards their boats．Then our small boat began to go down and we found ourselves in the water．Most of the food was lost and we had only two dry guns out of five．Somehow we got ashore and into the stockade，but we knew there was going to be a fight．’
　　‘But you won，’I said．
　　‘Yes，’agreed Dr Livesey．‘We killed another of their men．badly wounded another，but lost one of our own poor Tom Redruth．’
　　After the doctor had finished，I told them my story，andabout Ben Gunn．Then we began to talk about what to donext．Our best plan was to kill the pirates one by one until the rest ran off or sailed away in the ship．
　　I was very tired，and fell asleep as the three men talked．It was the sound of voices shouting that woke me the next morning．
　　‘A white flag！’I heard someone say．‘It's Silver！’
　　I ran to a hole in the wall and looked through．Two men were outside the stockade，one waving a white cloth The other man was Silver．It was a very cold morning，the sky bright and without a cloud，but Silver and his man were standing in a low mist．
　　‘What do you want？’shouted Captain Smollett．
　　The man beside Silver replied，‘Cap’n Silver，sir，to talk about peace．’
　　‘Cap’n Silver？’said the captain．‘Who is he？’
　　Long John answered Me，sir．The men chose me to be captain after you deserted the ship We're willing to make peace if we can all agree．All I ask is your promise to allow me safely out of the stockade．’
　　‘I don't want to talk to you，’said Captain Smollett，‘but if you want to talk to me，you may come．’
　　Silver came towards the stockade，threw his crutch over the fence，then climbed after it．With great difficulty，he walked up the hill of soft sand．
　　‘Aren't you going to let me inside？’said Long John．‘It's a cold morning to be outside．’
　　‘If you were an honest man，Silver，’said the captain，‘you could be in your kitchen．You're either my ship's cook，or Cap’n Silver，a dirty pirate！Now，if you've anything to say，say it！’
　　‘Well now，Cap’n Smollett，’said Silver，sitting down in the sand，‘you were very clever，last night．One of you is very quick with a knife，isn't he？Some of my men were frightened，and perhaps I was too．Perhaps that's why I'm here now．But you won't do it again，by thunder！We'll drink less rum and watch more carefully．I was asleep，but I almost caught you．The man you knifed wasn't dead when I reached him．’
　　‘Well？’said Captain Smollett，pretending to understand．But I guessed what Silver was talking about．I remembered Ben Gunn's last words to me．Perhaps he had visited the pirates during the night，when they were lying around their fire，full of rum．
　　‘We want that treasure，and we'll have it！’said Silver．‘Now，you have a map．Give it to us，and stop killing poor sea-men when they're asleep，and we'll let you choose what to do．Either come aboard ship with us when we have the treasure，and we'll take you to a safe place；or stay here on the island．’
　　‘Is that all？’asked Captain Smollett．
　　‘It's my last word，by thunder！’said Silver．‘Refuse，and you'll all die．’
　　‘Now you'll hear me，’said the captain．‘If you come up one by one，without weapons，I'll take you home to a fair trial in England．You can't find the treasure without the map．None of you knows how to sail the ship home．And you can't fight us—Gray got away from five of you．If you say no，the next time I see you I'll put a bullet in your back．Now，get out of here quickly．’
　　Silver's eyes were filled with anger．‘Somebody help me up！’he shouted，but none of us moved．Swearing angrily，he pulled himself across the sand to the fence．There，he was able to lift himself on to his crutch again and then climb out of the stockade．
　　‘Before the hour is over，’shouted Silver，‘I'll break your old house like a rum bottle！And those that die will be the lucky ones！’
　　As soon as Silver disappeared，we got ready for a battle，placing ourselves around the sides of the stockade．The captain went round to check our places and our guns，and to see that everything was ready．
　　A minute later，Joyce fired his pistol and the battle had be-gun．Shots came from every side of the stockade，hitting the wooden house，but the bullets did not get through the thick walls．Then there was silence and the smoke slowly cleared away．
　　Suddenly，guns were fired again，and a group of pirates ran from the woods and on to the stockade．They climbed over the fence like monkeys while the squire and Gray fired at them．In a few seconds，two fell dead，one was running back into the trees，and four were inside the stockade．
　　‘Fight them in the open！’cried the captain．
　　I took a sword and ran out into the sun．More pirates were starting to climb into the stockade．One man，wearing a red cap and with a knife in his mouth，was already on top of the fence．
　　But in that moment，the fight was over and we had won．Gray cut down one man with his sword．Another was shot as he fired into the house，and now lay wounded with his smoking pistol in his hand．The doctor had cut down a third．The men on the fence had disappeared back into the trees．And of the four who had climbed into the stockade，only one was not wounded，and he was climbing out again with the fear of death in him．






■ 11 Sea adventure
　　The doctor，Gray and I ran back into the house．We saw Hunter lying still，after a knock on the head．Joyce lay dead，shot through the head；and the squire was half-carrying the wounded captain．
　　The pirates did not return，and we had time to take care of the wounded．Out of the eight men who fell in the fight，only three still breathed．One pirate，Hunter，and Captain Smollett；and of these，the first two were nearly dead．The pirate died first，then Hunter only a few hours later．
　　The captain's wounds were bad but not dangerous．The doctor told him he must not walk or move his arm，and to speak only when it was necessary．
　　After dinner，the squire and the doctor sat by the captain's side and talked．Then，a little past noon，the doctor took his hat，his pistols and a sword，put the map in his pocket，and walked off quickly through the trees．
　　I guessed he was going to see Ben Gunn，and thought the doctor was lucky to be walking in the cool shadows of the wood．The house was hot and smelt of blood，and there were dead bodies lying all around．Suddenly，I wanted to get away from that place----and I had an idea！I would go and look for Ben Gunn's boat！Perhaps we would need it some time．That was my excuse to myself，although I knew it was wrong of me to leave only two unwounded men to guard the stockade．It was also wrong of me to leave secretly，but that is what I did．
　　I filled my pockets with bread，then took two pistols and the powder for them．When Gray and Mr Trelawney were helping the captain，I climbed quickly out of the stockade and ran into the trees．
　　I made my way towards the east coast．It was late in the afternoon，but still warm．Soon cool air began to reach me，and suddenly there was the sea．I walked along the edge，then up to a small sand-covered hill．
　　Ben Gunn had told me his boat was hidden near the white rock，and I found that rock farther along the beach．The little boat was hidden in the grass----a small，rough thing，made of wood and goat-skins．
　　I knew I should go back to the stockade now，but an idea came to me and I sat down to wait for darkness．As the last of the day disappeared，there were two lights in the blackness．One came from a great fire on the shore where the pirates sat singing and drinking；the other came from the Hispaniola out at sea．
　　I put the small boat on my shoulders and carried it to the edge of the water，then I put it in the sea．It was a very safe boat，but difficult to control．It turned every way except the one I wanted to go！
　　The sea carried me out to the Hispaniola．I knew if I cut the anchor rope at the wrong moment，the Hispaniola would make a sudden move out to sea，and my boat might be knocked out of the water．So I took my knife and cut almost through the rope，then waited，listening to the sound of two loud voices coming from the cabin．Both men sounded drunk，and both were angry．
　　At last the wind turned the ship towards me and now I cut all the way through the rope．As fast as I could，I pushed my little boat along the side of the ship，desperate to get away before the ship crashed into me．Just as I gave the final push，my hand found a rope over the end of the ship．
　　I don't know why I took hold of the rope，but I did．I pulled my boat near to the ship，then stood up to see through the cabin window．I had wondered why the two men weren't on deck，but one look through the window gave me my answer．It was Israel Hands and the man in the red cap，now locked in battle，each with a hand round the other's neck．
　　I dropped down in the boat again，looking over my shoulder at the shore．And there，right behind me，was the pirate's fire on the beach！Then the wind，with sudden violence，turned the Hispaniola，and my little boat with it，and we were both sailing fast into the open sea．
　　There were sudden shouts and the sound of hurrying feet as the two men ran on deck．I lay down in my boat，sure that when we reached the rough，open water，that would be the end for me．I lay there for many hours，but at last I fell asleep，and in my small，helpless boat，dreamed of home and the Admiral Benbow．
　　It was daylight when I woke up．The sun was still hidden be-hind Spyglass Hill，which came down to the sea in dangerous cliffs on this side of the island．It was no place to row ashore，or I would be killed on the rocks．Also，the boat was so small that when I rowed，the waves came over the sides of the boat．I decided to wait until the sea took me somewhere safer on the north side of the island．
　　‘I must keep the water out of the boat，’I thought，‘but I can row a little in the smooth places．’
　　It was very tiring work，and it kept me busy so that I did not look up and see the Hispaniola until she was just half a mile away from me！But something strange was happening to her．First the ship turned north，then suddenly to the west a-gain．
　　‘She's out of control！’I thought．
　　Then the ship turned again，big and dangerous as she came closer and closer to Ben Gunn's little boat．Suddenly，I was on the top of one wave as she came thundering over the next．And there she was，almost upon me！
　　I jumped up，pushed the boat under the water with my feet，and caught one of the ship's ropes．Then I heard the Hispaniola hit the little boat，and I was left with no way to escape．






■ 12 Israel Hands
　　I lost no time and climbed up the rope on to the deck of the ship．The two men were there，red-cap on his back，Israel Hands against the side，his face white There was dark blood around them on the deck，and I was sure each had killed the other in their drunken fight．
　　Then Israel Hands turned with a low cry of pain．He looked across at me and whispered one word：‘Rum’．
　　I went below to the cabin where there were empty bottles on the floor and tobacco smoke filled the air．I found a bottle with some rum left in it，and found some water and some bread and cheese for myself．I took the bottle back on deck，where Hands drank half the rum before taking the bottle from his mouth．
　　‘By thunder！’he said．‘I wanted some of that．But where have you come from？’
　　I've come to take control of this ship，Mr Hands，’I said，‘so please remember I'm your captain．’
　　He watched me pull down the Jolly Roger and throw it overboard，then he said，‘I expect you'll want to go ashore now．Suppose we talk about it．’There was some colour back in his cheeks but he looked very sick．‘Who's going to sail the ship now？You can't do it；but if you give me food and drink and a handkerchief to tie up my wound，I'll tell you how to sail her．’
　　‘All right，’I agreed．‘We'll go into North Inlet and quietly put her on the beach there．’
　　In three minutes I had the Hispaniola sailing easily before the wind，along the coast of Treasure Island．Then I went be-low and got a handkerchief and helped．Hands tie up the great bleeding wound in his leg．He ate a little and drank more of the rum，then he began to look a little better．
　　We sailed ahead of the wind，the island moving past quickly．After my success，I was less sorry about deserting the stockade．There was only one thing that worried me．It was the way Israel Hands watched me at my work，a cold little smile on his face．
　　We could not put the ship on the beach when we reached North Inlet because the sea was too high．We had to wait，sit ting in silence over another meal．
　　‘Cap’n，’Hands said to me，still with that smile on his face，‘my old mate，O’Brien，is dead．Can you throw him overboard？’
　　‘I'm not strong enough，’I said．
　　There was a pause，then he said，‘Well now，would you be very kind and go down to the cabin and fetch me a bottle of wine，Jim？This rum's too strong for my head．’
　　I listened to his words but didn't believe them．He wanted me to leave the deck，that was clear，but why？
　　‘Wine？’I said．‘Will you have white or red？’
　　‘I don't mind，’he said，‘as long as it's strong and there's plenty of it．’
　　‘I'll have to search for it，’I told him．
　　I went below，then took off my shoes and went quietly up the other stairs to watch him．He was on his hands and knees and，although his leg hurt him，he moved quickly across the deck and took a long knife from among some ropes．I could see the blood on it．Then he hid it under his coat and went back to his place．
　　This was all I needed to know Israel Hands could move about and now had a weapon，and he was going to try to kill me．But I knew that he wouldn't use the knife until the ship was safely on the beach．I went back to the cabin，put my shoes on again，and picked up a bottle of wine．Then I went back up on deck．
　　He took a long drink from the bottle of wine，saying，Here's luck！’
　　Afterwards，we sailed into North Inlet and I forgot to watch Hands carefully．We were nearly on the beach and I was looking over the side of the ship．Perhaps I heard a sound or saw his shadow moving，I don't know．But when I looked round，there he was，half-way towards me with the knife in his right hand！
　　He threw himself at me and I jumped to one side，leaving him to fall on the deck．Quickly，I took a pistol from my pocket and aimed it at him----he powder was wet and the pistol didn't fire！He got up and came at me with surprising speed，but suddenly the Hispaniola hit the sand and went over on one side．We were．both thrown down and began to roll across the deck，but I was on my feet first and climbed up into the sails，hand over hand．When I was in a safe place，I loaded my pistols，this time with dry powder．
　　Hands was pulling himself up among the sails now，the knife between his teeth．
　　‘One more step，’I said，‘and I'll kill you！’
　　‘Jim，’he said．He took the knife from his mouth to speak，and looked beaten．‘We'll have to make peace，you and I．You're too sharp and quick for an old sailor like me…’
　　But then，with a sudden movement，his hand went back and something went speeding through the air．I felt a sharp pain，and I was pinned to the mast by my shoulder．In the terrible pain and surprise of the moment，both my pistols went off and fell from my hands．
　　They did not fall alone．With a cry，Hands fell into the water．He came up，the water around him red from his blood，then he went down again，for ever．
　　I felt sick and frightened．The blood from my wound ran over my back and chest，and the knife seemed to burn like hot iron．But I was trembling so badly that it shook the knife out of my skin，and I could move again．I climbed down through the sails，then went below to tie up my wound．There was a lot of blood but it wasn't deep．Next，I went up on deck．It was now evening and a light wind was blowing，so I lowered the sails before climbing down a rope and into the sea．
　　The water was only waist-deep and I walked ashore．The sun had gone now and，once on dry land，I began to walk to the stockade．Perhaps the others would blame me for deserting，I thought，but Captain Smollett would be pleased I had taken the Hispaniola，I was sure．
　　When I reached the stockade，the house lay in dark shadow．But on the other side，a large fire had almost burned itself out．This seemed strange，as it had not been our habit to build lange fires．
　　There were no sounds，except for the wind in the trees，and I went quietly round to the eastern side，keeping in the shadows．As I came nearer to the corner of the house，I heard my friends breathing loudly as they slept，and at once felt happier again．I got to the door and looked in，but all was dark and I could see nothing．With my arms out in front of me，I walked in．
　　Suddenly，there was a high voice screaming in the darkness：‘Pieces of eight！Pieces of eight！Pieces of eight！’It was Silver's parrot，Captain Flint！
　　Immediately，men began to wake up，and I heard Silver's voice shout，‘Who's there？’
　　I turned to run，crashed violently against one person，then ran straight into the arms of another．






■ 13 A prisoner of the enemy
　　Somebody brought a light and I saw the inside of the house．Five pirates were on their feet，and another man was lying down with a head wound．But my heart became filled with fear when I saw no prisoners．Were my friends all dead？
　　‘Here's Jim Hawkins！’said Silver．‘How friendly of you to visit us，Jim！’
　　‘Where are my friends？’I asked．
　　Silver answered in a smooth voice．‘Yesterday．morning，Doctor Livesey came down with a white flag．“Cap’n Silver，”he said，“you've lost．The ship's gone．”We looked out and，by thunder，the ship had gone！“Let's bargain，”said the doctor．So we bargained，and here we are，in the house．And your friends？They walked off and I don't know where they are．And now，are you going to join us，Jim？’
　　‘You're in trouble，’I said．‘Ship lost，treasure lost，men lost．And if you want to know who did it----it was me！I was in the apple barrel the night we saw the island，and I heard every word you said．And the ship？It was me who cut her ropes and killed the men aboard her，and it's me who has sailed her to a place where you'll never find her．Kill me if you like，but if you let me live，I'll do what I can to save you when you're arrested and brought to trial for piracy．
　　One man swore and jumped forward with his knife．
　　‘Get back there！’cried Silver．‘Did you think you were cap’n here，Tom Morgan？Well，there's never been a man to stand against me．and see another day！’
　　Angry whispers came from the other men．
　　‘Did any of you gentlemen want to argue with me？’shouted Silver．‘Well，I'm ready．Let him take a knife，and I'll see the colour of his inside！’
　　Not a man answered．I listened to my heart beating．Silver waited calmly，his pipe in his mouth，as he watched his followers．Slowly，they got together at the far end of the house and whispered to each other．
　　‘You seem to have a lot to say，’said Silver．‘Let me hear it，or stop talking．’
　　‘We'll go outside and talk，’replied one man．And he stepped calmly towards the door and disappeared out of the house．One after another，the rest of the men did the same．
　　‘They're going to kill you，Jim，’said Silver when the two of us were alone，‘and they're going to stop me being their captain．When I looked into that bay and saw the ship was gone，I knew it was all over．Now，I'll save your life，if I can，but it must be a bargain----you must save Long John from dying under the law．’
　　‘I'll do what I can，’I told him．
　　‘There's trouble coming，Jim，’he said．‘And talking of trouble，why did the doctor give me the map？’
　　I stared at him in great surprise．Why indeed？
　　‘Well，he did，’Silver went on．‘And that's strange．’
　　The door opened and the five pirates came in．They pushed one man forward and he gave something to Silver．
　　The sea cook looked at what the man had given him．‘The black spot！’he said．He turned the paper over．‘What's this？No longer captain．You're becoming quite a leading man in this crew，George Merry．You'll be cap’n next，I suppose．But tell me what's wrong．’
　　‘I'll tell you what's wrong！’said George．‘First，you made too many mistakes on this trip．Second，you let the enemy out of this trap for nothing．And then there's this boy．’
　　‘Is that all？’asked Silver quietly．
　　‘It's enough，’replied George．
　　‘Well，I'll answer you，’said Silver．‘You all know what I wanted but you wouldn't listen，would you？In my plan，we'd be on the Hispaniola now，every dead man alive and the treasure on ship，by thunder！Next，this boy．Well，we'll use him to bargain with．He might be our last chance．And the doctor？You've been glad enough to have a doctor coming to see you every day----you，John，with your head broken…or you，George，sick and shaking with fever only a few hours ago．I made a bargain，that's why I let’em go！’He threw a piece of paper on to the floor．It was the map with the three crosses．
　　The pirates jumped on it like cats upon a mouse．
　　‘Very pretty，’said George，‘but how are we going to get away with the treasure，when we have no ship？’
　　‘You tell me，George！’shouted Silver．‘You and the others lost the ship；I found the treasure．But I'll not be your captain any longer！’
　　‘Silver for cap’n！’shouted the pirates．
　　After a moment，the sea cook smiled．‘George，’he said．‘I think you'll have to wait a while before you get another chance to be captain．’
　　Early in the morning Dr Livesey came to the stockade．
　　‘We've a surprise for you，doctor，’Silver called out．‘We've a little stranger here．’
　　The doctor was now inside the stockade．‘Not Jim？’
　　‘The very same Jim，’said Silver．
　　The doctor stopped．‘Well，well，’he said．Then he went on，Let's see these sick men of yours，Silver．’
　　A moment afterwards，he entered the house．With one look at me，he went to his work among the sick．
　　‘Well，that's done，’he said，after visiting each man．‘And now I'd like to talk to that boy，please．’
　　‘No！’cried George Merry．
　　‘Silence！’shouted Silver．‘Hawkins，’he went on in his usual voice，‘will you promise not to escape？’I gave the promise．‘Then，doctor，’said Silver，‘you just step outside that stockade，and when you're there，I'll bring the boy down on the inside．You can talk through the fence．’
　　The men's anger exploded after the doctor left the house，and they accused Silver of trying to make a separate peace for himself．Silver waved the map in front of them and told them they were stupid．
　　‘By thunder！’he cried．‘We'll break the peace when the right time comes----and that's not now！’And then he walked out on his crutch，his hand on my shoulder．‘Slowly，boy，’he whispered to me．‘We don't want to worry them．’
　　Dr Livesey was waiting outside the stockade．‘The boy will tell you how I saved his life，’Silver said through the fence．‘Will you say a good word for me？’
　　‘You're not afraid，John，are you？’asked Dr Livesey．
　　‘I don't like the idea of dying by the law，’said Silver．‘And now I'll leave you and Jim alone．’
　　‘So，Jim，’said the doctor，‘here you are．I'm disappointed in you．You went away when Captain Smollett was wounded，which wasn't a brave thing to do．’
　　‘Doctor，’I cried，‘I've blamed myself enough．’
　　‘Jim，’said the doctor，his voice changed．‘Jim，I can't have this．Jump over and we'll run！’
　　‘No，’I said．‘I promised Silver I wouldn't escape，and I must go back．But listen，I took the ship and she's in North Inlet，on the beach．’
　　‘The ship！’cried the doctor．
　　I told him my story and he listened in silence Then he said，‘It's you that saves our lives，Jim，and now we'll save yours．Silver！’he called，then as the cook came nearer，said，‘Some Advice----don't hurry to find that treasure．If you do，watch out for storms．’
　　‘What's the game，doctor？’said Silver．‘Why did you give me the map？’
　　‘I can't say more，’said the doctor．‘It's not my secret to tell．But if we both get out of this alive，Silver，I'll do my best to save you．Now，keep the boy close beside you，and when you need help，shout for it．’
　　Then Dr Livesey hurried off into the wood．






■ 14 Looking for the treasure
　　We went back to eat our breakfast．
　　‘They have the ship，’Silver told the men，‘and I don't know where it is．But once we have the treasure，we'll find it soon enough．I'll keep the boy close by me when we look for the treasure；then，when we have both ship and treasure，we'll persuade Jim to join us，and give him some of the treasure for all his help．’
　　The men were happy，but I was afraid．If Silver's plan came true，he would forget Dr Livesey and the others，I was sure And if things went wrong，how could a boy and a one-legged man fight five strong men？
　　When we left the stockade，everyone had weapons except me．Silver had two guns；and the parrot，Captain Flint，sat on his shoulder．There was a rope around me and I followed after Silver，who held the other end．
　　Some of the men carried spades，others food and rum，and we made our way to the beach where the two boats were waiting．The men talked about the map．The cross was too large to be of much help，and the words on the back of the map were no better．
　　Tall tree．Spyglass shoulder，to the North of North-
　　North-East．
　　Skeleton Island East-South-East and by East．
　　We landed the boats at the mouth of the second river，then began to climb Spyglass Hill．Silver and I followed a long way behind the rest，and I had to help him．We were near the top when a man on the left cried aloud．The others started to run towards him．
　　‘He can't have found the treasure，’said Morgan．
　　And indeed it was something very different—the bones of a human skeleton，a few pieces of clothing still on it．Cold fear filled every heart．
　　‘He was a seaman，’said George Merry．
　　‘Yes，’agreed Silver But look at the way those bones are lying—it isn't natural．’The man lay perfectly straight—his feet pointing one way，his hands，over his head，pointing the opposite way．‘I've got an idea，’said Silver．‘Look！We can see the top of Skeleton Island from here．These bones are a pointer，telling us which way to go！’
　　He was right．Our compass showed that the body pointed straight towards Skeleton Island，and in a line East-South-East and by East．
　　We left the skeleton behind，but now the pirates kept together and talked in frightened whispers．At the top of the hill，Silver took out his compass again．
　　‘There are three tall trees，’he said，‘in about the right place．Spyglass shoulder must be that lower place，there．A child could find the treasure now！’
　　Suddenly，out of the middle of the trees in front of us，a high shaking voice began to sing：
　　Fifteen men on the dead man's chest----
　　Yo-ho-ho，and a bottle of rum！
　　The effect on the pirates was terrible to see．The colour went from their six faces，and they caught hold of each other like frightened children．Morgan fell to the ground，trembling with fear．
　　‘It's Flint！’cried George Merry．
　　‘No！’said Silver，fighting to get the word out．‘It's someone playing games----it's no ghost！’
　　Then the voice came again：‘Darby M’Graw！’it screamed．‘Darby M’Graw！Fetch the rum！’
　　The pirates were fixed to the ground after the voice died away，their staring eyes full of horror．
　　‘That does it！’said one．‘Let's go！’
　　‘Those were Flint's last words before he died，’cried Morgan．
　　‘I'm here to get that treasure，’shouted Silver，‘and I'll not be beaten by man or ghost！I was never afraid of Flint in his life and，by thunder，I'll face him dead！There's seven hundred thousand pounds not a quarter of a mile from here．I'll not leave that much money for a drunken old seaman----him dead，too！And there's something strange．There was an echo，and no man ever saw a ghost with a shadow，so why should a ghost's voice have an echo？It's not natural．’
　　The words calmed George Merry．‘Yes，that's right，’he said．‘Now I think about it，it was like Flint's voice，but not exactly like it．It was like another person's voice…more like----’
　　‘Ben Gunn！’shouted Silver．
　　‘If it was，it's still a ghost，’said Dick．‘Ben Gunn's not here in body，any more than Flint is．’
　　But the older men laughed．‘Nobody minds Ben Gunn，Dead or alive，’cried George．
　　The men were happy again，the colour back in their faces as they talked together and began to walk on．George Merry went first，leading the way with Silver's compass．
　　We reached the first tall tree，but it was the wrong one．So was the second．The third was tall enough to be seen from the sea，both east and west of the island．My companions hurried on，desperate to get their hands on the seven hundred thousand pounds in gold which lay somewhere under the tree's shadows．
　　Silver pulled at the rope that held me，and turned his eyes upon me with a deadly look．I could read his thoughts．So near to the gold now，everything was forgotten—his promise and the doctor's warning．I knew he hoped to take the treasure，cut every honest throat on that island，find and board the Hispaniola at night，and sail away a rich man and a murderer．
　　Suddenly，George Merry shouted，‘All together，boys！’，and the men began to run．Not ten metres farther on they stopped and cried out．Silver moved quickly，and the next moment we were with them Before us was a large hole，but it was not a new hole because grass grew on the bottom．
　　There was no treasure．
　　The seven hundred thousand pounds had gone！






■ 15 End of an adventure
　　The pirates could not believe it，but Silver remained calm and changed his plan quickly．
　　‘Jim，’he whispered，‘take that，and be ready for trouble．’And he passed me a pistol．
　　At the same time he began to move quietly and，after a few steps，the hole was between us and the other five．He looked quite friendly now，and I couldn't help whispering，‘So you've changed sides again！’
　　The pirates began to jump into the hole，and to dig in the ground with their fingers．Morgan found a two-guinea coin，and it went from hand to hand．
　　‘Two guineas！’shouted George Merry，shaking it at Silver．‘That's your seven hundred thousand pounds！You're the man for bargains，are you？You're the one who never made a mistake！’
　　‘Wanting to be captain again，George？’said Silver．
　　But this time，everyone was on George Merry's side，and they began to climb out of the hole．
　　‘There's just the two of them，’said George．‘The old one-legged man who brought us all here for nothing；and that boy who I'm going to have the heart of！’
　　He was raising his arm and his voice，ready to lead them，but there was a sudden CRACK！CRACK！CRACK！as three gunshots came from the woods George Merry fell head first in to the hole，and another fell on his side，dead The other three turned and ran．
　　A moment later，Dr Livesey，Gray，and Ben Gunn joined us with smoking guns，from among the trees．
　　‘Keep them off the boats！’cried the doctor．
　　We began to run at a great speed through the trees，and Silver was soon thirty metres behind us．
　　‘Doctor！’he shouted．‘There's no hurry！Look！’
　　We saw he was right．In a more open place，we could see the three pirates，still running，and we were already between them and the Boats．So we sat down to rest while Long John came slowly up to us．
　　‘Thank you，doctor，’he said．‘You came at the right time to save me and Hawkins．’He looked at Ben Gunn．‘So it was you，Ben Gunn，playing the ghost！’
　　We walked down the hill to the boats and，as we did so，the doctor told Silver and me his story．But it was really Ben's story from beginning to end．
　　Ben，in his lonely walks around the island，had found the skeleton and found the treasure．He had carried the gold on his back in many journeys，and had taken it to a cave on the north-east corner of the island，two months before the Hispaniola arrived．
　　Ben had told the doctor this，and the next morning the doctor gave Silver the map----which was now useless----and gave him the food at the stockade，because there was plenty in Ben Gunn's cave．That morning，when the doctor saw I had to go with the pirates to find the treasure，he had left the squire to look after the captain，then took Gray and Ben Gunn with him to be ready to help us．
　　‘I was lucky Hawkins was with me，’said Silver，‘or old John would be dead by now，for sure．’
　　By this time，we were at the boats．The doctor smashed one with an axe，and then we all got into the other and rowed to North Inlet．The Hispaniola was moving by herself now，the sea high enough to take her off the beach．We went round to Rum Cove，the nearest landing place for Ben Gunn's cave of treasure，then Gray left us there before rowing back to guard the ship for the night．
　　Mr Trelawney met us at the cave．He didn't blame me for my desertion，but he spoke differently to Silver．‘Silver，’he said，‘you're a scoundrel and a murderer，but I'm told that I must save you from the law．’
　　‘Thank you，sir，’replied Long John．
　　‘I don't want your thanks！’cried the squire．
　　We all entered the cave．It was large and pleasant，with fresh water coming from a place in the ground，and a floor of sand．Captain Smollett lay in front of a big fire，and in a corner I saw coins and gold bars．It was Flint's treasure！
　　We had come so far to find this．Already it had cost the lives of seventeen men from the Hispaniola．And how many others？How many ships had gone to the bottom of the sea？How many brave men had been murdered for this？Perhaps no man alive could tell．
　　Next morning，we moved all the gold to the beach．Then we took it by boat to the Hispaniola．It was a big job for so small a number of men．
　　The three pirates who were still on the island did not trouble us．They were not going to fight any more，and we decided we must leave them on the island．We left powder，food，clothes and medicine for them．
　　Then at last，one sunny morning，we sailed out of North Inlet and towards the nearest port in Spanish America．Before afternoon，Treasure Island had disappeared from view，and I had never felt happier to leave a place behind．
　　The sun was going down when we sailed into the port，and the doctor and Mr Trelawney took me on shore．When we came back，Ben Gunn was waiting for us．
　　‘Silver has gone，’he told us，‘but not empty-handed．He's taken one of the bags of coins，perhps worth three or four hundred guineas．’
　　I think we were all pleased to lose the scoundrel at so small a price．
　　We found a crew for the ship at the port，and then had a good voyage home．Only five of the men who had sailed from Bristol with the Hispaniola returned with her．We all took a large piece of the treasure，and some used it sensibly，and some did not．
　　Captain Smollett no longer goes to sea．Gray saved his money and is now half-owner and captain of a fine ship．Ben Gunn got a thousand pounds which he spent or lost in three weeks，then he came begging and was given a job as a gatekeeper．
　　Of Silver we have heard no more．That frightening seaman with one leg has．gone out of my lift．I will never return to Treasure Island，but in my worst dreams I still hear the sharp，high scream of Captain Flint the parrot：‘Pieces of eight！Pieces of eight！’




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde by Robert Louis Stevenson





■ 1 The mysterious door
　　Mr Utterson the lawyer was a quiet， serious man． Hewas shy with strangers and afraid of showing his feelings． Among friends， however， his eyes shone with kindnessand goodness．And， although this goodness never found itsway into his conversation， it showed itself in his way of life．He did not allow himself many enjoyable things in life． He ateand drank simply and， although he enjoyed the theatre，hehad not been to a play for twenty years． However， he wasgentler towards other men' s weaknesses，and was alwaysready to help rather than blame them． As a lawyer， he was often the last good person that evil-doers met on their way toprison，or worse． These people often carried with them memories of his politeness and fairness．
　　Mr Utterson's best friend was a distant cousin calledRichard Enfield，who was well known as a fun-loving 'manabout town'．Nobody could understand why they werefriends， as they were different from each other in every way．They often took long walks together，however， marchingthrough the streets of London in companionable silence．
　　One of these walks used to take them down a narrow sidestreet in a busy part of London． It was a clean， busy， friendlystreet with bright little shops and shiny doorknockers． Nearthe end of this street， however， stood a dark， mysterious，windowless building．The door had neither bell nor knockerand looked dusty and uncared for． Dirty children played fearlessly on the doorstep， and nobody ever opened the door todrive them away．
　　One day，as Mr Enfield and his friend passed the building，Mr Enfield pointed to it．
　　'Have you ever noticed that place？'he asked．'It remindsme of a very strange story．'
　　'Really？'said Mr Utterson．'Tell me．'
　　'Well，'began Enfield，'I was coming home about threeo'clock on a black winter morning，when suddenly I saw twopeople．The first was a short man who was walking along thestreet，and the second was a little girl who was running as fastas she could． Well，the two bumped into each other and thechild fell down．Then a terrible thing happened．The mancalmly walked all over the child's body with his heavy boots，and left her screaming on the ground．It was an inhuman thingto do．I ran after the man， caught him and fetched him back．There was already a small crowd around the screaming child．The man was perfectly cool， but he gave me a very evil look，which made me feel sick in my stomach．The child's familythen arrived， and also a doctor． The child had been sent tofetch the doctor for a sick neighbour，and was on her wayhome again．
　　'“The child is more frightened than hurt，”said thedoctor—and that， you would think， was the end of the story．But， you see，I had taken a violent dislike to the short man．So had the child's family—that was only natural．But the doctor， who seemed a quiet， kindly man， was also looking at ourprisoner with murder in his eyes．
　　'The doctor and I understood each other perfectly．Together we shouted at the man， and told him we would tell this story all over London so that his name would be hated．
　　'He looked back at us with a proud，blach look．“Nameyour price，”he said．
　　'We made him agree to a hundred pounds for the child' sfamily． With another black look， the man led us to that doorover there．He took out a key and let himself into thebuilding．Presently he came out and handed us ten pounds ingold and a cheque for ninety pounds from Coutts's Bank． Thename on the cheque was a well-known one．
　　'“See here，”said the doctor doubtfully，“it isn't usual for aman to walk into an empty house at four in the morning andcome out with another man's cheque for nearly a hundredpounds．”
　　'“Don't worry，”said the man with an ugly look，“I'll staywith you until the banks open，and
　　change the chequemyself．”
　　'So we all went off， the doctor and the prisoner and myself，and spent the rest of the night at my house．In the morningwe went together to the bank． Sure enough， the cheque wasgood， and the money was passed to the child's family．'
　　'Well，well，'said Mr Utterson．
　　'Yes，'said Enfield，'it's a strange story．My prisoner wasclearly a hard， cruel man． But the man whose name was onthe cheque was well known all over London for his kind andgenerous acts．Why would a man like that give his cheque to acriminal？'
　　'And you don't know if the writer of the cheque lives inthat building？'asked Mr Utterson．
　　'I don't like to ask，'said his friend．'In my experience，it's not a good idea to ask too many questions，in case the answers are ugly，violent ones．But I've studied the place alittle．It doesn't seem like a house． There's no other door，and the only person who uses that door is the man I've just described to you．There are three windows on the side of thehouse，which look down onto a small courtyard．The windowsare shut，but they're always clean．There's a chimney too，which is usually smoking．So somebody must live there．'
　　The two men continued on their walk． Then Utterson brokethe silence．
　　'Enfield，'he said，'you're right about not asking toomany questions．However，I want to ask the name of the manwho walked over the child．'
　　'Very well，' said Enfield．'He told us his name wasHyde．'
　　'What does he look like？'
　　'He's not easy to describe， although I remember him perfectly．He's a strange-looking man．He's short，but has astrong， heavy body．There's something wrong with his appearance，something ugly and unpleasing—no，somethinghateful．I disliked him at once．'
　　Mr Utterson thought deeply．'Are you sure he used a key？'he asked．
　　'What do you mean？'asked Enfield in surprise．
　　'I know it must seem strange，'said his friend．'But yousee， if I don't ask you the name on the cheque， it's because Iknow it already…'
　　'Well， why didn't you tell me？'said his friend rathercrossly．'Anyway， he did have a key， and he still has it． Isaw him use it only a week ago．'
　　Mr Utterson looked at him thoughtfully，but said nothingmore．






■ 2 In search of Mr Hyde
　　After dinner that evening Mr Utterson went into his office and unlocked a cupboard． He took out an envelope．It contained the will of Doctor Henry Jekyll，and was writtenin the doctor's own handwriting．
　　'If I die，or if I disappear for more than three months，'thewill began，'I wish to leave everything I own to my dearfriend Edward Hyde．'
　　This will had both worried and annoyed Mr Utterson． To alawyer it was an unusual and dangerous kind of will． It wasbad enough when Edward Hyde was only an unknown name，but now that the lawyer knew something about Hyde， the willworried him more than ever． It had seemed like madness before；now it began to seem shameful． With a heavy heart MrUtterson replaced the envelope in the cupboard，put on hiscoat and went to see his old friend Doctor Lanyon．
　　Doctor Lanyon was enjoying his after-dinner coffee．'Comein，old friend！' he cried． The two men had known each othersince their school days．They sat for several minutes，drinkingcoffee and talking companionably of this and that． At last MrUtterson mentioned the thoughts that were worrying him．
　　'I suppose，Lanyon，'he said，'that you and I are HenryJekyll's oldest friends？'
　　'I suppose so，'said Doctor Lanyon，'but I don't often seehim now．'
　　'Really？' said Mr Utterson in surprise．'I thought you andhe were interested in the same things．'
　　'We were at one time，'said Doctor Lanyon．'But morethan ten years ago Henry Jekyll became too—well，imaginativefor me． He developed some strange，wild， unscientific ideas． Itold him so，and I've seen very little of him since then．'
　　Mr Utterson looked at his friend's red， angry face．'Only adisagreement about some scientific question，'he thought．'It's nothing worse than that．' Calmly he continued，'Didyou ever meet a friend of Jekyll's a man called Hyde？'
　　'Hyde？'repeated Lanyon．'No， never．'
　　Soon the lawyer said goodnight and went home to bed，where he lay awake for a long time thinking about Enfield's description of Hyde，and Doctor Jekyll's will．When at last hefell asleep，he was troubled by dreams． In his mind's eye hesaw a faceless man marching over the child's body．Then hesaw his old friend Jekyll in bed，while the same faceless figurestood over him．The facelessness of that figure worried himdeeply．
　　'Very well，Mr Hyde，'said the lawyer to himself，'I willfind you，and I will see your face for myself．'
　　During the next few weeks Mr Utterson spent many hoursin the narrow street where Enfield had seen Hyde．He waitedpatiently near the mysterious door， hoping for a sight of MrHyde—and one dry， clear winter night he was successful．The street was empty and silent and small sounds carried along way．The lawyer heard footsteps． He stepped back intothe shadows and waited．A short figure turned the corner andwalked towards the mysterious door． Although Mr Uttersoncould not see his face， he felt a strong， almost violent， dislikefor the stranger．
　　Mr Utterson stepped forward and touched him on the shoulder．'Mr Hyde？'
　　'Yes，that's my name，'said the stranger coolly．' What doyou want？'
　　'I see that you're going in．I'm an old friend of DoctorJekyll's．My name is Utterson．You must have heard myname—may I come in with you？'
　　'Doctor Jekyll is not at home，'replied Mr Hyde．'How didyou know me？'he added sharply．
　　'First let me see your face，'replied the lawyer．
　　Mr Hyde hesitated for a moment， then he stood under thestreet light and the lawyer saw his face．'Thank you，' saidMr Utterson．'Now I shall know you again． It may beuseful．'
　　'Yes，'said Mr Hyde，'it may indeed be useful．Here，too，is my address．You may need it one day．'He gave the lawyerhis address，which was in a poor part of London．
　　'Good God！'thought the lawyer，'does Hyde know aboutJekyll's will？Is that what he's thinking of？'But he saidnothing．
　　'And now，'said Mr Hyde，'How did you know me？'
　　'You were described to me．'
　　'Who did that？'
　　'I know people who know you．'
　　'Who？' asked Mr Hyde sharply．
　　'Doctor Jekyll，for example，'said the lawyer．
　　'He never told you！'cried Mr Hyde in sudden anger．'Don't lie to me！'And before the lawyer could answer， heturned the key in the lock and disappeared into the house．
　　Mr Utterson stared at the closed door．'Why do I dislikehim so much？'he said to himself．'Enfield was right—thereis something evil about the man．Poor Henry Jekyll，I'm worried about you． Your new friend will mean trouble for you．'
　　Round the corner from the narrow street there was a squareof handsome old houses．One of these was Doctor．Jekyll's house，and Mr Utterson knocked at the front door． The servant answered and told him that Doctor Jekyll was not athome．
　　'I saw Mr Hyde go in by the laboratory door in the street atthe back of the house， said the lawyer．
　　'That's right，Mr Utterson，'replied the servant． 'MrHyde has his own key， and comes and goes when he likes． Wehave orders from Doctor Jekyll to obey him．'
　　Mr Utterson walked home more worried than ever．
　　A fortnight later Doctor Jekyll gave a dinner party for a fewold friends．Mr Utterson was among them and he remained after the others had left．
　　'I've been wanting to speak to you for some time，Jekyll，'said the lawyer，'about your will．'
　　Doctor Jekyll was a tall， well－made man of fifty with asmooth， kindly face．'My poor friend，'he said，'you doworry unnecessarily， you know． Like poor Lanyon when Itold him about my new ideas．“Imaginative rubbish”he calledthem… I'm very disappointed in Lanyon．'
　　But the lawyer did not want to talk about Doctor Lanyon．'You know I've never agreed with your will，'he continued．'You've told me often enough，'said his friend sharply．
　　'Well，I've learnt something about your friend Hyde，'continued the lawyer．
　　The colour of the doctor's handsome face changed from pinkto greyish-white．'I don't want to hear any more，'he said．'You don't understand． I'm in a very difficult，painful situation．
　　'Tell me everything，'said Mr Utterson，'and I'll do mybest to help you．'
　　'You're very kind，but this is a private matter．I'll tell youone thing—I can get rid of Mr Hyde any time I want． Youmust understand，however， that I take a great interest in poorHyde．I know you've seen him—he told me， and I'm afraidhe wasn't very polite to you． But I really do care about him．And if anything happens to me，I want you to promise tomake sure that he inherits my money．'
　　'I cannot pretend that I shall ever like him，' said thelawyer．
　　'I'm not asking you to like him，'said his friend．'I onlyask you to help him，when I'm gone．'
　　'I promise，'said Mr Utterson sadly．






■ 3 The Carew murder
　　One night in London，nearly a year later， a servant girlwas sitting at her bedroom window， looking out at themoonlit street． She saw a tall， handsome old man with whitehair coming along the street，and a shorter，younger manwalkingtowardshim．The old man spoke politely to theyounger one． He seemed， the girl said later， to be asking hisway． Then the girl looked more closely at the younger manand recognized him．
　　'It was Mr Hyde， 'she said later．'He once visited my master．'
　　Mr Hyde， the girl said， was carrying a heavy stick． He wasplaying with it impatiently as he listened to the old man． Thensuddenly he seemed to explode with anger．
　　'He was like a madman，'the servant girl said．' He shookhis stick at the old man，who stepped back in surprise． Thenhe hit the old man violently with the stick and knocked him tothe ground． He beat the helpless body again and again． I couldhear the bones breaking… It was so terrible that I began tofeel ill．Then everything went black and I don't remember anymore．'
　　It was two o'clock in the morning before she was consciousagain， and able to call the police． The murderer had disappeared，but the dead man was still lying on the ground withthe murder weapon beside him．The stick had broken in themiddle， and one half still lay beside the murdered man． Thepolice decided that the murderer had carried away the otherhalf．A gold watch and a purse were found in the dead man'spockets， but no cards or papers— except a letter addressed toMr Utterson．
　　A policeman brought this letter to the lawyer the nextmorning．Together they drove to the police station where thebody had been taken．
　　A police inspector showed him the body．
　　'Yes，I recognize him，'said Mr Utterson heavily．'He isSir Danvers Carew．'
　　'Thank you， sir，'said the inspector．'And do you recognizethis？' He showed Mr Utterson the broken stick and told himthe servant girl's story．
　　Mr Utterson knew the stick at once．'That's HenryJekyll's stick！'he said to himself．'I gave it to him long ago．'
　　'Is this Hyde a short， evil－looking man？'he asked．
　　'That's how the servant girl described him， sir，'agreed theinspector．
　　'Come with me，'said Mr Utterson to the inspector．'Ithink I know where he lives．'
　　Mr Utterson led him to the address on Mr Hyde' s visitingcard．It was in a poor part of London，in a dirty street full ofcheap bars and eating－houses． This was the home of HenryJekyll's favourite friend—the man who would inherit Jekyll'squarter of a million pounds．
　　An old servant opened the door．Under her silvery hair wasa smooth face with a false smile and evil eyes， but she was polite enough．
　　'Yes，'she said，'Mr Hyde lives here．But he's not athome． My master came in very late last night．He left againafter only an hour．'
　　'Was that unusual？'asked the inspector．
　　'Not at all，'replied the servant．'He's often away，andfrequently stays away for months at a time．'
　　'We would like to see his flat，'said Mr Utterson．
　　'Oh，I can't do that，sir—'began the servant．
　　'This gentleman is a police inspector，'said Mr Utterson．
　　'Ah！' said the servant，looking unnaturally pleased aboutit，' Mr Hyde's in trouble！What's he done？'
　　Mr Utterson and the inspector looked at each other．'Hedoesn't seem a very popular person，'said the inspector．Heturned to the servant．'Now please let us in and we'll have alook around．'
　　Mr Hyde had only two rooms in the house．These were extremely comfortable and in excellent taste，with beautiful pictures on the walls and rich carpets on the floor．Everythingwas wildly untidy，however，and the fireplace was full of halfburnt papers． Among these the detective found part of acheque book．He also found the other half of the murderweapon．
　　'Excellent！'he said．'Now let's visit the bank and see ifthey recognize this cheque book．'
　　Sure enough， the bank held several thousand pounds in anaccount in the name of Edward Hyde．
　　'We've got him now， sir，'said the inspector．'We've gotthe murder weapon，and we've got his cheque book． Now weonly need his description on the“Wanted”notices．'
　　This was not so easy． There were no photographs of thewanted man and no two people could agree about his appearance．They all agreed on one thing， however．'An evil man，sir，'the servant girl said．'You could see it in his face．'






■ 4 Doctor Jekyll receives a letter
　　Later that same afternoon Mr Utterson found his way toDoctor Jekyll's house．Jekyll's servant， Poole， let himin at once and took him through the kitchen and across theback garden to the laboratory behind the house．It was thefirst time that Mr Utterson had seen his friend's laboratory，and he looked around curiously．
　　The old servant led Mr Utterson through the laboratory andup some stairs to the doctor's private study above．This was alarge room with tall， glass－fronted cupboards， a large mirrorand a big，businesslike table．A good fire burned in the fireplace and beside it sat Doctor Jekyll， looking white and ill． Ina thin， tired voice he welcomed his friend．
　　'Have you heard the news？'said Mr Utterson after the oldservant had left．
　　'The newsboys were shouting about it in the street，'DoctorJekyll said．'A terrible business．'
　　'Let me ask you something，'said the lawyer．'Sir DanversCarew was my client， but you are my client too，and I want toknow what I'm doing．You haven't tried to hide the murderer， have you？'
　　'Utterson，I promise you，'cried the doctor，'I promise youI'll never see him again． I've finished with him for ever． Andnow， indeed， he no longer needs my help．You don't knowhim like I do． He's safe， quite safe．Believe me，nobody willever hear of Hyde again．'
　　The lawyer listened with a serious face． He did not like hisfriend's feverish， excited look．
　　'You seem very sure of him，'he replied．'I hope you'reright．If he is caught and comes to trial，your name may bementioned．'
　　'I'm absolutely sure of him，' answered Jekyll．' I can't tellyou how I know，
　　but I'm certain． But can you please adviseme about one thing？I've received a letter and I don't knowwhether to show it to the police．May I leave it in your hands，Utterson？'
　　'You're afraid，I suppose， that the letter will lead the police to Hyde？'asked the lawyer．
　　'No，'said Doctor Jekyll．'I don't care what happens toHyde．I was thinking of my own reputation… Anyway，here is the letter．'
　　It was written in a strange，pointed handwriting and signed'Edward Hyde'．'I am sorry that I have been so ungrateful inthe past for your many generous acts，'it began．'Please don't worry about me．I am quite safe and I am certain that I can escape unharmed whenever I wish．'
　　'Did this letter come by post？'asked the lawyer．
　　'No，'replied Doctor Jekyll．'There was no postmark on theenvelope．The letter came by hand．'
　　'Shall I keep the letter and think about it？'asked Mr Utterson．
　　'I want you to decide for me，'answered his client．'I' mnot sure of anything any more．'
　　'Very well，'said the lawyer．'Now tell me—the part inyour will about disappearing for three months or more． Wasthat Hyde's idea？'
　　'It was，'whispered Doctor Jekyll．
　　'He was planning to murder you，'said the lawyer．'You've had a lucky escape．'
　　'I've had a lesson too，'said his client， in pain and sadness．'Oh， what a lesson！' And he covered his face with his hands．
　　On his way ont of the house， the lawyer stopped and spoketo Poole．
　　'By the way，'he said， 'a letter was handed in today foryour master． Who brought it， and what did he look like？'
　　'Nobody came except the postman， sir，'said the servant insurprise．
　　'That worries me，'thought Mr Utterson as he walkedhome．'Clearly the letter arrived by the laboratory door； perhaps it was even written in the study． I must think about thiscarefully．'
　　In the street the newsboys were still shouting，'Read allabout it！Terrible murder！'
　　The lawyer's thoughts were sad． One of his clients wasdead，and the life and reputation of another were in danger．Mr Utterson did not
　　usually ask anyone for advice． Today，however，was different．
　　That evening he sat by his fireside with his chief clerk， MrGuest，beside him．The lawyer and his clerk had worked together for many years， and knew and understood each other，Also， Mr Guest had been involved in business with DoctorJekyll and knew him well．
　　Outside it was foggy and dark，but the room was bright andwarm and there was a bottle of good whisky on the table，
　　'This is a sad business about Sir Danvers Carew，'said MrUtterson．
　　'Yes indeed，sir．The murderer was a madman，of course．'
　　'I would like your opinion about that，'replied the lawyer．'I have a letter from the murderer here．'
　　Mr Guest was interested in the study of handwriting． Hiseyes brightened at once．'A murderer's letter！' he said．'That will be interesting．'He looked carefully at the writing．'Not a madman， I think，'he said．'But what unusual handwriting！'
　　Just then a servant entered with a note．
　　'Is that note from Doctor Jekyll？' asked Mr Guest．'Ithought I recognized the handwriting．Is it anything private，Mr Utterson？'
　　'Only an invitation to dinner．Why？Do you want to seethe letter？'
　　'Just for a moment，please，sir．'The clerk put the two letters side by side and studied them carefully．'Thank you，sir，'he said．'Very interesting．'
　　For a moment Mr Utterson hesitated，wondering and worrying．At last he put his thoughts into words．'Why did youlook at the two letters together？'he asked．
　　'Well，sir，in many ways the two are surprisingly similar．'
　　'How strange！…Mr Guest，I must ask you not to speakof this business to anyone．'
　　'Of course not，sir，'said the clerk．'You can depend onme．'Shortly afterwards he said good night to his master andmade his way home．
　　When he was alone，Mr Utterson locked the two letters inhis cupboard．'Well！'he thought．'So Henry Jekyll wrotethat letter for a murderer！'His face was as calm and expressionless as usual，but his heart was filled with fear for his oldfriend．






■ 5 The death of a friend
　　Time passed．The search for Mr Hyde continued．SirDanvers Carew was an important and popular man andthe police tried desperately to arrest the murderer and bringhim to trial．But there was no sign of Mr Hyde himself， although the police and the newspapers discovered a lot about hispast life．Nobody，it seemed，could say one good word aboutthe wanted man． He was a cruel， violent man， who had livedan evil life full of hate and jealousy．None of this， however，was any help to the police． Mr Hyde had just disappeared．
　　As time went by， Mr Utterson became calmer and more atpeace with himself． He was truly sorry that his client， SirDanvers Carew， was dead， but he was also very glad that MrHyde had disappeared． As for Doctor Jekyll， he too appearedcalmer and happier．He came out into the world again．He invited friends to his house and accepted invitations to theirs． Hehad always been a good and generous man．Now，however，hebecame a churchgoer too． He was busy， he spent a lot of timein the fresh air and he looked happy and carefree．For morethan two months he was at peace with himself and the world．
　　On the 8th of January Mr Utterson was invited to dinner atDoctor Jekyll's house．Doctor Lanyon was there too．'This isquite like old times，'thought the lawyer as he watched DoctorJekyll smiling at Doctor Lanyon．
　　On January 12th，however，and again on the 14th， DoctorJekyll refused to see visitors．
　　'The doctor is not well，'explained Poole．'He hopes youwill forgive him，but he cannot see anyone．'
　　Mr Utterson called again next day， and again the day afterthat．After two months of almost daily meetings with his oldfriend，the lawyer felt rather lonely．On the sixth evening heinvited his clerk，Mr Guest，to dinner with him， and on theseventh night he went to visit Doctor Lanyon．
　　Doctor Lanyon made him welcome，but Mr Utterson wasshocked by the change in the doctor's appearance．His face，which was usually pink and healthy， was grey and thin， andthere was a frightened look in his eyes． He was suddenly anold，sick man．
　　'He looks，'said Mr Utterson to himself，'like a man whoknows he's dying．'
　　'How are you，Lanyon？'he said．'You don't look well．'
　　'I've had a shock，Utterson，'replied Doctor Lanyon．'Andit will cause my death．I have only a few weeks to live．'Hepaused．'Well，it comes to us all sooner or later． I've had agood life， on the whole．'
　　'Jekyll is ill too，'said the lawyer．'Have you seen him？'
　　At the name of Jekyll the look on Doctor Lanyon's face changed．'Please，'he said， holding up a trembling hand，'don't speak that name in this house．'
　　'Oh dear，'said Mr Utterson．He hesitated for a moment．'The three of us have been friends all our lives，Lanyon．Weare too old now to make new friends．Can't you forgive andforget？Perhaps I can help？'
　　'Nothing can be done，'replied Doctor Lanyon．'Ask himyourself．'
　　'He won't let me into the house．'
　　'That doesn't surprise me， One day，Utterson， after I amdead，you will perhaps learn the full story． Meanwhile， if youcan sit and talk to me of other things， please stay． Just don't mention that person， as it hurts me to think about him．'
　　As soon as he got home， Mr Utterson wrote to DoctorJekyll．In his letter he asked why Jekyll refused to let him intohis house，and why he and Doctor Lanyon were no longerfriendly．The reply was long and not always easy to understand．
　　'I'm not angry with our old friend，'Doctor Jekyll wrote，'but I agree with him that the two of us must never meetagain．Meanwhile，you must forgive me if from now on I livea very quiet life． If you find my door closed to you，it's because I must travel this dark，dangerous road alone． I havedone wrong and I'm being punished for it，and nobody canhelp me．'
　　'What is this？'thought Mr Utterson．'Hyde has disappeared．Jekyll is his normal self again—at least，he was untillast week． Has he gone mad？'Then he remembered DoctorLanyon's words．'There is something more，'he said to himself，'something mysterious， but I have no idea what it is．'
　　A week later Doctor Lanyon was too ill to leave his bed．Two weeks after that he was dead． After his friend's burial，Mr Utterson went home and into his office．From his lockedcupboard he took out an envelope， which he had received soonafter his friend' s death．
　　In Doctor Lanyon's handwriting he read 'G．J．Utterson．Private．'The lawyer turned the envelope over and over in hishands before he opened it．What terrible news could itcontain？ With trembling hands Mr Utterson opened the envelope． Inside was another envelope， with the words'Not to beopened until the death or disappearance of Doctor HenryJekyll．'
　　The lawyer could not believe his eyes．'Death or disappearance'— the words were the same as in Doctor Jekyll's will．'Iunderstand why Jekyll wrote those words，'said Mr Uttersonto himself．'But why did Lanyon write them too？'For a moment he wanted to open the envelope and uncover the mysterythere and then． But Mr Utterson was too honest a man and alawyer to do that． He knew he must obey his friend's andclient's last wish． He locked the envelope away in his cupboard beside Doctor Jekyll's will．
　　The lawyer was desperately worried about his friend DoctorJekyll． He was afraid for him too． He called at the house butthe doctor always refused to see him．
　　'How is he，Poole？'Mr Utterson asked the old servant oneday．
　　'Not very well，sir．He spends all his time in the studyabove his laboratory．He sleeps there as well． He seems verysilent and uneasy． Something is worrying him， sir，
　　but hewon't tell anyone．'
　　For a long time the lawyer called almost every day． Little bylittle，however， he became tired of his friend's refusal to seehim， and his visits became less frequent．






■ 6 The face at the window
　　One Sunday soon afterwards Mr Utterson was walkingwith his friend Enfield when they happened to passthrough the narrow side-street again． Enfleld pointed to themysterious door．
　　'Well，'he said，'that story is finished．We shall never seeMr Hyde again．'
　　'I hope you're right，'said the lawyer．'Did I tell you？ Ionce saw Hyde too and had the same strong feelings of dislikefor him as you did．What an evil man！'
　　'I agree，'said his friend．'By the way， why didn't you tellme that our mysterious door led to the laboratory at the back ofDoctor Jekyll's house？I didn't know then，but I know now．'
　　'Well，now that you know，let's go into the courtyard andlook up at his window．I must tell you，'I'm worried aboutpoor Jekyll．Perhaps the sight of a friendly face will do himgood．'
　　Overhead the evening sky was bright，but the courtyard wascool and dark．At an open window of the study above the laboratory， Doctor Jekyll sat， like a prisoner staring at the worldoutside．
　　'I hope you are better，Jekyll，'the lawyer called up to him．
　　The doctor shook his head sadly．'I'm not well，Utterson，'he said．'I shall not be here much longer－thankGod．'
　　'You spend too much time indoors！You ought to get outinto the fresh air like Enfield and me… By the way， this ismy cousin， Mr Enfield… COme now-get your hat and join usfor a quick walk．'
　　'You 're very kind，'said the doctor．'But no， it's quiteimpossible． I would like to invite you and Mr Enfield inside，but the place is not very tidy…'
　　'Well then，'said the lawyer gently，'we can talk to youfrom here．'
　　'That's an excellent idea-'began the doctor，with asmile．But suddenly the smile left his face and was replaced byan expression of hopelessness， fear and horror． The two menbelow saw it，but only for a second， as the window was shutwith a bang． The two men looked at each other， then turnedand left the courtyard without a word．In silence they crossedthe narrow side-street．They did not speak until they came outinto a busy， noisy street． Then Mr Utterson at last turned andlooked at his companion， whose face was as pale as his own．The expression on Doctor Jekyll's face had upset them bothdeeply．
　　'God help him！'whispered Mr Utterson．'God help thepoor man！'
　　But Mr Enfield only nodded his head very seriously andwalked on without a word．






■ 7 The last night
　　It was now March， and Mr Utterson was sitting by thefire after dinner，when he was surprised to receive avisitfrom Doctor Jekyll's servant，Poole．The old man looked paleand frightened．
　　'Mr Utterson，he said，'something is wrong．'
　　'Sit down by the fire and tell me all abut it．'
　　'The doctor's locked himself up in his study， sir．'
　　'That's quite usual， surely，' said the lawyer． 'You knowyour master's habits as well as I do．He often shuts himselfaway from the world．'
　　'Yes，but this time it's different． It frightens me， sirI've been frightened for more than a week now， and I justcan't go on any longer．
　　He stopped and stared down at the floor．
　　'Try and tell me， Poole，'said Mr Utterson gently． 'Something terrible is happening to my master．I can't explain． But… please，sir，can you come with me and see foryourself？'
　　At once Mr Utterson fetched his coat and hat．
　　'Thank you， sir，'whispered Poole gratefully．
　　Together they made their way to Doctor Jekyll's house． Itwas a wild，stormy night．To Mr Utterson the streets seemedstrangely empty and lonely． The square， when they reachedit， was full of wind and flying dust． The thin trees were blowing wildly， and untidy grey clouds were sailing past a pale，sickly moon．
　　'Well，sir，'said Poole，' here we are， and I hope that nothing is wrong．'He knocked softly at the front door． The doorwas opened just a little and a voice from inside asked，'Is thatyou，Poole？'
　　'Yes-open the door．'
　　The hall，when they entered，was brightly lit．A good firewas burning．The room was full of people-every servant inthe house was there．They looked like a crowd of frightenedchildren．
　　'What's all this？'said the lawyer．'What are you all doinghere？ Your master would not be pleased．'
　　'They're frightened，'said Poole simply．No one elsespoke．A little servant girl began to cry．
　　'Quiet！'said Poole sharply，trying to control his own fear．'Now-fetch me a light and we'll finish this business at once．Mr Utterson， sir， please follow me．'He led the way across theback garden towards the laboratory．
　　'Come as quietly as you can， sir．I want you to hear， but Idon't want him to hear you．And sin－if he asks you to go inside-don't go！'
　　Mr Utterson's heart gave a little jump of fear， but hebravely followed the servant into the laboratory to the bottomof the stairs．
　　'Wait here， sir-and listen carefully，whispered Poole． Hehimself，again controlling his fear， climbed the stairs andknocked on the study door．
　　'Mr Utterson would like to see you， sir，'he called．
　　'Tell him I cannot see anyone，' said a voice from inside theStudy．
　　'Thank you，sir，'said Poole．He led Mr Utterson backacross the garden and into the house． 'Sir，'he said， 'was thatmy master's voice？'
　　The lawyer's face was pale． 'It has changed，'he said．
　　'Changed？ You're right，'said Poole．'I've worked forDoctof Jekyll for twenty years．That was not my master's voice．Someone has murdered my master． Eight days ago weheard his voice for the last time．“Dear God！”he cried-thenno more．The voice you heard just now was the voice of hismuderer！'
　　'This is an extraordinary story， my good man，'said Mr Utterson． He tried hard to appear calm．'If Dr Jekyll has beenmurdered-why is his murderer still there？ What reason couldhe possibly have for staying？'
　　'Perhaps you don't believe me， sir， but I know what Iheard．For a week now the person-or thing-in that studyhas been crying night and day for some special chemical powders．My master was in the habit，when he was particularlybusy with his scientific work，of writing orders on pieces ofpaper and leaving them on the stairs．'We've had nothing elsethis week， nothing except written orders and a locked door．I've been to every chemist in town in search of these chemicalsof his，but they were never right．They weren't pure enough，he said． I had to take them back to the shop，and try anotherchemist．I don't know what these chemicals are，but the person in that study wants them terribly badly．'
　　'Did you keep any of these written orders？'asked Mr Utterson．
　　Poole reached in his pocket and brought out a note．Thelawyer read it carefully．It said：'I am returning your chemicals，as they are impure and therefore useless．In the year18-you made up a mixture of chemical powders for DoctorHenry Jekyll． Please search your cupboards for some more ofthe same mixture and send it to Doctor Jekyll AT ONCE．Thisis VERY IMPORTANT．'
　　'This is a strange note，'said Mr Utterson．
　　'The chemist thought so too，' sir，'said Poole．'When I tookhim this note，he cried，“All my chemicals are pure，and youcan tell your master so！”and he threw the note back at me．'
　　'Are you sure this is your master's handwriting？' asked MrUtterson．
　　'Of course，sir，'said Poole．'But what does handwritingmatter？ I've seen my master's murderer！'
　　'Seen him？'repeated Mr Utterson．
　　'Yes！It was like this．I came suddenly into the laboratoryfrom the garden．I think he had left the study to look forsomething．The study door was open and there he was at thefar end of the laboratory．He was searching among some oldboxes．He looked up when I came in， gave a kind of cry andran upstairs and into the study．I only saw him for a moment，but my blood seemed to freeze．Sir，if that was my master，why was he wearing a mask over his face？ If it was my master， why did he cry out like a trapped animal and run awayfrom me？ I've been his servant for twenty years．And then …'Poole paused，and covered his face with his hands，tooupset to speak．
　　'This is all very mysterious，'said Mr Utterson，' but I thinkI begin to understand．Your master， Poole，is ill．And the illness has changed his appearance．Perhaps that also explainsthe change in his voice．It certainly explains the mask and theway he has been avoiding his friends．And of course，he's searching for these chemicals he cause he believes they willmake him well again．Dear God，I hope he's right！PoorJekyll-thst is my explanation．It's sad enough，Poole，butit's normal and natural，and there's nothing to be alarmedabout．'
　　'Sir，'said the servant，'that…thing was not my master．My master is a tall，fine，well－built man．The stranger wasmuch shorter… Sir，I have been with my master for twentyyears and I know his appearance as well as I know my own．No，sir，that thing in the mask was never Doctor Jekyll， and Ibelieve that he-it-murdered my master！'
　　'Poole，'said the lawyer，if you say that， I must makesure． We must break down the study door．'
　　'You're right， Mr Utterson！'cried the old servant．
　　'Very well． Will you help me？ If we are wrong， I'll makesure that you're not blamed for it．'
　　'There's an axe in the laboratory， suggested Poole．
　　'You realize， Poole，'said Mr Utterson，'that this may bedangerous for us both？ Let us now be honest with each other．This masked figure that you saw-you're certain that it wasnot your master·'
　　'That's right， sir．'
　　'Did you in fact recognize it？'
　　'Well，sir，it was all so quick that I'm not really sure．But－well，I think it was Mr Hyde．It was short，like MrHyde， and it moved in the same light， quick， active way． Andwho else could come in by the laboratory door from the street？You must remember，sir，that at the time of the Carew murder Mr Hyde still had the laboratory key with him． But that's not all．Mr Utterson， did you ever meet Mr Hyde？'
　　'Yes，'replied the lawyer．'I once spoke with him．'
　　'Then you will know， sir，that there is something strangeabout Mr Hyde，something evil．'
　　'I agree with you，'said Mr Utterson．'I felt something likethst， too．'
　　'Yes，sir．Well，when that thing in the mask jumped outfrom behind the boxes and ran up the stairs，I had exactly thesame feeling．That thing behind the mask was Mr Hydee！'
　　'I understand，Poole，and I believe you，'said the lawyerslowly．'And I believe poor Henry Jekyll has been murdered．I believe too that his murderer is still hiding in the study．Now， Poole， let's go and make an end of it．'
　　Together they went out into the back garden．The cloudshad covered the moon and it was now quite dark． As theypassed silently by the wall of the laboratory， they stopped andlistened．Further away they could hear the everyday noises of aLondon evening． From the study above them， however，camethe sound of footsteps moving backwards and forwards acrossthe floor．
　　'It walks like that all day，sir，'whisperedPoole，'yes，andmost of the night too．It only stops when some more chemicalsarrive from the chemist．Ah， sir，listen to that-do you thinkthose are my master's footsteps？'
　　The short，light steps were indeed very different from Henry Jekyll's long，heavy ones．
　　'Have you anything else to tell me，Poole？'asked thelawyer heavily．
　　'Once，'said Poole，'I heard it weeping．'
　　'Weeping？'repeated Mr Utterson in horror．
　　'Weeping like a lost child，'said the old servant．'It tore myheart． I felt like weeping too．'
　　'well，'said the lawyer，'we have a job to do．'
　　They went into the laboratory and climbed the stairs to thestudy．'Jekyll，'called the lawyer in a loud voice，'I must seeyou．'He paused for a moment，but there was no reply．'Ifyou refuse to let me in， then I'll break dowu the door！'
　　'Utterson，'said a voice from inside the study，'I beg you toleave me alone！'
　　'That's not Jekyll's voice！' shied Mr Utterson． 'It's Hyde's！Break the door down， Poole ！'
　　The axe rose and fell．The door shook and a scream of purefear，like a trapped animal，rang from the study． Again theaxe crashed against the door．But the wood was strong and thelock was well made．At last， however， the door fell inwardsupon the carpet．
　　The two men stared into the study．They saw a warm，comfortable room with a good fire burning in the fireplace anda few papers on the big table． A friendly， homely room． Butface down in the middle of the floor there lay the body of aman．The lawyer turned it over on its back and saw the face ofEdward Hyde． He was dressed in clothes that were much toolarge for him， and in his hand he held a small bottle．
　　The lawyer shook his head．'He's taken poison， Poole， hesaid．'I fear we've come too late to save Doctor Jekyll， andtoo late to punish his murderer too． Now we must find yourmaster's body．'
　　They searched everywhere，but there was no sign of HenryJekyll， dead or alive．
　　'Perhaps your master has escaped，'said Mr Utterson hopefully． He went to check the door from the laboratory into thenarrow side－street．It was locked，and covered with dust．Onthe floor nearby he found a broken key．
　　'It's a long time since anyone opened this door！' said MrUtterson．
　　'Yes，'said Poole，picking up the broken key．'So how didHyde get in？'
　　'This is too difficult for me，Pooh，'said the lawyer．'Let'sgo back to the study．'
　　They searched the study again．'Look，sir，'said Poole，Pointing to a small bable in the corner．There were bottles ofliquid and some white powders lying in saucers．'He was testing his chemicals here．'
　　One of the doctor's books was lying on the floor． Its coverwas torn off．The lawyer picked it up．Doctor Jekyll loved hisbooks and always took great care of them． But he had writtenall over this one-the handwriting was unmistakable-beforetearing it and throwing it on the floor．
　　Then the lawyer noticed the tall mirror on the wall betweenthe glass-fronted bookshelves．
　　'How strange，'said Mr Utterson．'Why did Jekyll want amirror in his study？'
　　Next they turned to the desk and found a large packet addressed to Mr Utterson． The handwriting was DoctorJekyll's．The lawyer opened the packet and three envelopesfell out on to the floor．The first contained a will． It was likeDoctor Jekyll's first win in every way- except one．The doctor had left all his money，not to Edward Hyde，but to GabrielJohn Utterson．
　　The lawyer looked at the will，then at Poole，and finally atthe dead man on the floor．
　　'I just don't understand，'he whispered．'Hyde has beenhere all this time-why didn't he destroy this will？'
　　He picked up the next envelope．It contained a short note inthe doctor's handwriting．Mr Utterson saw the date．'Poole！'he cried，'this is today's date on the letter． Jekyllwas alive here today． He can't be dead-he has run away or ishiding somewhere．And if so， why？If he's alive，can we besure that Hyde killed himself？ We must be careful， Poole，orwe may involve your master in some terrible danger．
　　'Why don't you read the note， sir？asked the servant．
　　'Because I'm afraid，said the lawyer，in a worried voice．Slowly，he lifted the letter，and read：
　　My dear Utterson，
　　If you are reading this，it means that I have disappeared．Please go home and read Lanyon's letter．Afterwards，pleaseread the confessicn of
　　Your unfortunate and unhappy friend，
　　Henry Jekyll
　　'This must be the confession， said Mr Utterson to himself，picking up the third and largest envelope．He put it in hispocket．'say nothing about these papers， Poole，'he said．' Ifyour master has died or disappeared，this paper may save hisreputation．It's now ten o'clock．I must go home and studythese papers in peace and quiet But I shall come back here before midnight，and then we shall send fof the police．
　　They went out，locking the laboratory door behind them．With a heavy heart Mr Utterson walked home to read his letters．






■ 8 Doctor Lanyon's letter
　　Dear Utterson，
　　Four days ago，on the 9th of January，I received a letterby the evening post it was in the handwriting of my oldfriend Henry Jekyll．I was rather surprised，as we were not inthe habit of writing to each other， and I had had dinner withhim the night before． When I came to read the letter， I waseven more surprised． The letter said：
　　Dear Lanyon，
　　You are one of my oldest friends． Although we havesometimes disagreed on scientific matters，I have alwaysremained your friend． I would do anything for you， Lanyon-please will you do something for me now？
　　Please， old friend，come to my house at once wth thisletter in your hand Poole，my servant， has his orders． Hewill be here with a locksmith．Break the lock of my studydoor， and then you must go in there alone．Open the glassfronted cupboard on the left－hand side and look on the fourthshelf from the top．On it you will find some pacKets of chemical powders， a small bottle and a book．Please take everything back to your house．
　　If you leave as soon as you receve this letter， you shouldbe back home before midnight．At that time you will recevea visit from a man．Please give him the bottle， the powdersand the book， and I shall aways be grateful to you．
　　Do not fail me， Lanyon． Believe me， my life and mypeace of mind depend on you．I am in fearful danger and only you can save me．
　　Your friend，
　　Henry Jekyll
　　After reading this letter， I was sure that Doctor Jekyll wasmad． But a friend is a friend， and so I went at once to hishouse．Jekyll's servant had received by the same post a letter similar to mine， and he was waiting for me with the locksmith．Together we went through the old laboratory andclimbed the stairs to the doctor's private study．The doorwas very strong， with an excellent lock， but the locksmithknew his job．Soon the door stood open and I entered thestudy．I opened the cupboard and found the shelf．Sureenough，the powders，the bottle and the book were there，and I took them home with me．
　　At home I lcoked at everything more carefully．There wereseveral packets of white powder and a bottle of red，strong－smelling liquid．The book contained nothing except alist of dates， going back several years．The last date wasnearly a year ago．Here and there the doctor had added afew words．The word'donble'appeared very early in thelist， followed by the word'Failed！！'．'Double'appeared inthe list several more times…What was Jekyll doing？Thebook looked like a list of unsuccessful experiments．Howcould I，by taking these things to my house，save my friend's life and peace of mind？And what was the reason for thismidnight visitor？ I put my old gun in my pocket， then I putevery thing in a box for my midnight visitor to collect．
　　At midnight exactly there was a knock on my door． A shortman was standing in the shadows．
　　'Are you from Doctor Jekyll？'I asked．He bent his head．
　　Although I could not see his face，there was something unpleasing about him and I was glad I had a weapon．I invitedhim into the house and there， in the bright light， I took a closer look at him．
　　His appearance was extremely strange． His clothes werewell made and expensive， but they were far too large forhim． He looked like a child wearing his father's clothes， butthere was nothing childlike about this man． He was short， asI have said， but very strong At the same time there was alook of sickness and horror about him，and his face was amask of pain， violence and hate．As a doctor I could pernapsfeel sorry for him；as a mau I felt only fear and dislike．
　　'you got it？'said the stranger impatiently，reachingout his hand and touching my arm． His touch made my bloodrun cold．I shook off his hand．'Come， sir，' I said calmly．'Sit down and introduce yourself．'
　　'I apologize， Doctor Lanyon，'the stranger said more politely．'Doctor Henry Jekyll sent me here on an importantmatter．I have to collect something from you．'
　　I gave him the box．He took it with trembling hands．' Atlast！'he cried．He turned to me．His face was deathly pale．'Have you a medicine glass？'he asked．
　　I gave it to him．He put a little of the red liquid in the glassand added a packet of powder．A small cloud of smoke rosefrom the glass and the colour of the liquid changed from redto purple， and from purple to a watery green．The strangerput the glass down on the table and looked sharply at me．
　　'And now，'he said，'choose carefully．You can leave theroom now ．Or you can stay and experience something new，something unknown to science． You can be rich，famous andsuccessful，if only you will believe'
　　'Sir，'I said，trying to remain calm，'I don't understandwhat you're trying to say，and I think you are probably madBut I will stay．'
　　'Very well，'said the stranger．'Now remember yourpromise． You've been an unbeliever all your life．Youlaughed at Doctor Jekyll's ideas and called them unscientificrubbish-now see for yourself！'
　　He put the glass to his lips and drank the liquid．His wholebody shook and jumped and he almost fell．He held onto theedge of the table， breathing fast through his open mouth． AsI watched，his whole body seemed to change．He seemed tobecome taller， fatter-his face turned black and its shapebegan to change…The next moment I jumped back againstthe wall，trembling with fear and horror．There before myeyes， pale and shaken and sick， stood Henry Jekyll！
　　I cannot make myself write down the things that Jekyll，with tears in his eyes， confessed to me that night
　　Now fear and horror are my only companions．Sleep has left me and I feel that I have not long to live． As I write， Iwonder． Did I imagine it all？As a scientist I cannot believeit-but I saw it happen with my own eyes．
　　I will say just one thing more，Utterson．The evil thing thatcame into my house that night-as Jekyll told me-wasknown by the name of Hyde， and was wanted by the policefor the murder of Sir Danvers Carew．
　　Hastie Lanyon
　　With fear in his heart，Mr Utterson put away Doctor Lanyon's letter， and then opened the confession of Doctor Henry Jekyll．






■ 9 Doctor Jekyll's confession
　　I was born in the year 18-． I inherited a large fortune，a strong healthy body and an excellent mind． I wasnaturally hard－working and soon I was extremely successful inmy chosen work as a scientist．Although I was still young，important people came to me for advice．At an age when mostyoung men are going out and having fun， I was behaving like agrey－haired old man．
　　This was not easy for me．The outside world saw a serious，hard－working doctor． Behind this quiet character， however，was an active， fun-loving young man-about-town． This， ofcourse， was nothing to be ashamed of， but I did not realizethat at the time． I was ashamed， and I soon learned to keepmy two lives separate．
　　I was not dishonest in any way．Both these people were me．The serious， successful young doctor was me， and the wild，fun-loving，irresponsible young man was me too．I thought about this for a long time and slowly I realized that I was notextraordinary in this． Every man has two sides to hischaracter． He is two people．They live together-often uncomfortably in the same body．
　　'How fantastic，'I thought， if I could separate these twocharacters and give my fun－loving side his freedom． Then hecould go out and enjoy himself unashamedly and leave serious，studious Doctor Jekyll to get on with his important， life-savingwork．'
　　'Was it possible，' I wondered，'to find a drug that couldgive each side of my characier its own separate face and body？'
　　After much thought and careful study I believed I had foundthe answer．I had read many scientific books and spent manyhours in my laboratory，searching for the right mixture ofchemicals to make my drug．At last I had everything I neededexcept a special kind of salt． I bought some from a chemist，and then I was ready．
　　I hesitated for a long time before I began my experiment．Only a small mistake in the mixture of the drug could meanimmediate death．But in the end，my wish to know wasstronger than my fear．And so， late one disastrous night， Imixed everything together and prepared my drug．I watchedthe smoke rising from the liquid as it changed colour from redto purple and at last to green．Then， bravely，I drank everybitter drop．
　　I felt a violent sickness in my stomach and a terrible pain inall my bones．The room seemed to turn round and round and Itrembled with fear．Then the fear and pain disappeared and astrange， sweet feeling took its place． Wild thoughts dancedthrough my mind． They were not good，serious thoughtsThey were the wild passions of an evil and cruel stranger． Butinside myself I felt younger， lighter， more carefree than everbefore．'If this is pure evil，'I thought，'I like it．'
　　I stood there． enjoying these strange new thoughts and passions-and suddenly realized that I was shorter．At that timethere was no mirror in my stidy． Later I put one on the wallof my study so that I could watch these changes in my appearance Now，however，it was three o'clock in the morning andall the servants were asleep．I decided it was safe to go to mybedroom in my new body and take a look at myself in the mirror there．I crossed the garden and entered my house like astranger． As I came into my room， I saw Edward Hyde forthe first time．
　　At that time，the good side of my character was strongerthan the evil side．Henry Jekyll had his faults，but he wasmostly a good， kind man．I cannot be sure，but I believe thatis the reason why Edward Hyde was so much smaller thanHenry Jekyll．But that was not the only difference betweenthe two men． Henry Jekyll had a kind， open， honest face．Pure evil stared out of Edward Hyde's eyes．I felt no dislike，however．Indeed，I welcomed him．Edward Hyde was me，young and strong and full of life．
　　Later，however，I noticed that Hyde's appearance andmanner had a strong effect on other people． Nobody couldmeet Edward Hyde without a feeling of dislike and horror． Ibelieve I understand the reason for this too． Everyone is a mixture of good and evil．Even the worst criminal has a little goodin him． Only Edward Hyde was pure evil．
　　I stood for a long time，staring at the mirror．'Am Itrapped？'I wondered．'If I am，I must leave this house beforedaylight． If I don't， I shall be arrested as a thief．
　　I hurried back to my study． With trembling hands I mixedanother dose of the drug and drank it．Again I felt that terriblePain and sickness， but a few seconds later I found myself withthe face and body and character of Henry Jekyll once more．
　　I blame myself for the things that happened later． It wasnot the fault of the drug．That was neither good nor evil．Butit opened the prison doors and all owed Edward Hyde toescape．Soon he was out of control． He， you will remember，was wholly evil．Doctor Jekyll was not wholly good， however．He was a normal man with normal faults and weaknesses， andHyde was too strong for him．
　　I welcomed Hyde，therefore．I arranged everything verycarefully．I bought a flat in a poor part of London， where Ikept Hyde's clothes and employed a servant to do the housework．I took a dose of the drug whenever I wanted to forgetmy old， quiet， serious self for a time． In those early daysGod forgive me！-I thought it was all very amusing． DoctorJekyll was well known．Nobody knew Hyde， however， and inhis body I was free to do as I wished．
　　I will not go into details about my adventures and shamefulacts as Hyde． Jekyll remained as good and kind as ever and always did his best to undo the harm that Hyde did． But as timewent by， Jekyll became less and less able to control Hyde．
　　One night Hyde injured a child in the street and a passer－bysaw him．That passer－by was your cousin． I recognized himwhen the two of you came to my window．Your cousin caughtHyde and an angry crowd collected． They asked for money forthe child's family． In the end， in order to escape， Hyde hadto give your cousin a cheque in the name of Jekyll．
　　I learned my lesson from this， and opened a new bank account in the name of Hyde． I even gave Hyde a different handwriting． I was sure I was safe-but I was wrong．
　　Two months before the murder of Sir Danvers Carew I wentout on one of my evil adventures．Before I went to bed，I tooka dose of the drug and became Doctor Jekyll once more． Iwoke up in bed the next morning with a strange feeling thatsomething was wrong… I looked around the room， thendown at my hand．Henry Jekyll's hand was large，white， andwellmade， but the hand I saw that morning on the bedcoverwas thin，bony， greyish－brown， and hairy．It was the hand ofEdward Hyde．
　　Sick with horror， I stared at it． I was Henry Jekyll when Iwent to bed，'I thought．'And now I am Edward Hyde…What possible explanation can there be？ And，moreimportant， how can I get to my study and take the drug？'
　　Then I realized that the servants were quite used to the comings and goings of Hyde． I put on Hyde's clothes and marchedconfidently through the house． Poole stared in surprise to seeMr Hyde so early in the morning， but I did not care． Tenminutes later Doctor Jekyll had returned to his own shape andwas sitting down，pretending to eat breakfast．
　　Too worried to eat， I sat there thinking hard about my situation． I realized that in recent weeks Hyde had become biggerand stronger， both in body and character．
　　'What will I do，'I thought，' Hyde takes control？'Ithought about the drug． Once，in the early days，it had failedcompletely， and sometimes I had had to take a double dose before I changed into Hyde．Now，however，it was quite easy tobecome Hyde-the problem was to become Jekyll again aftermy adventures．My good self and my evil self were fighting formy mind and body-and my evil self was winning．
　　I knew I had to choose between the two， and I chose DoctorJekyll． Perhaps I was not wholly serious about this，however，because I did not sell Hyde's flat or destroy his clothes． Fortwo months I lived the life of a quiet and responsible man． Butsoon I began to miss Hyde-his strong young body， his love oflife and his dark adventures in the narrow， nameless streets ofLondon．One night， when my life as Jekyll seemed imposslblydull and boring， I mixed a dose of the drug and drank it．
　　It was like opening the door of a cage and letting a wild animal escape．That night I became a madman， and beat Sir Danvers to death-for no reason at all．I felt only a wild delight asI hit his body again and again． Afterwards I ran to the flat anddestroyed all my papers． I was not ashamed of my crime． Instead I was filled with a high，sweet excitement． I relived themurder as I walked back home through the streets． I feltstrong and masterful…Edward Hyde had a song on his lipsas he mixed a dose of the drug．'Your very good health， SirDanvers！'he laughed as he drank．A moment of terrible pain，then poor Henry Jekyll fell to his knees and begged God to forgive him．
　　When I was myself again，I locked the door that led fromthe street to my laboratory． I broke the key and threw itaway． Goodbye for ever，Mr Hyde！I whispered．
　　The next day the news of the murder was all over London．The servant girl had seen the crime and recognized Mr Hyde．My other self was wanted by the police．
　　In some ways I was glad． Now Hyde could not show hisface to the world again． If he did， every honest man in London would be proud to report him to the police．
　　Once again I led a busy，responsible and almost happy life…until one fine，clear January day． I was sitting on a seat inthe park，enjoying the sunshine，when suddenly I felt deathlysick．I began to tremble all over． Soon， however， I felt wellagain－not only well， but young，strong and fearless． I lookeddown； my clothes were suddenly too big，the hand on my kneewas the bony，hairy hand of Edward Hyde． It was so sudden．One moment I was a famous and popular doctor，the next Iwas a violent criminal who was wanted for murder．
　　How could I get to my study to take the drug？ I had lockedthe street door to my laboratory and broken the key． I couldnot， therefore，enter from the street． I could not go inthrough the house because of the servants．I needed help fromoutside．I thought of Lanyon，but how could I reach him？And how could I persuade him to let Hyde into his home？How，too，could I persuade him to break into Doctor Jekyll's private study？It looked impossible． Then I remembered．My appearance was unrecognizable，but my handwriting was unchanged．I'could still write a letterin Doctor Jekyll's name！Calling a passing taxicab，I orderedthe driver to drive to a hotel quite near Lanyon's house．Ofcourse Jekyll's clothes were much too large for my body，and Ihad trouble in climbing into the cab．The driver noticed mystrange appearance and could not help laughing．I gave himsuch a black look，however，that the smile froze on his face．In my desperate fear and danger，I was like a pain-maddened animal，ready to kill or wound at any moment．I wanted topull the driver from his seat and murder him then and there．But I was clever too．My life depended on my coolness，and Ifought to control my murderous passions．
　　We reached the hotel．I paid the driver and went inside，holding up my too-large trousers．The servants smiled whenthey saw my strange appearance．I stared angrily at them andtheir smiles disappeared at once．I gave my orders and they ledme to a private room and brought me some writing paper and apen．
　　Hyde in danger of his life was a new experience for me．He—I write'he'because I find it hard to write'I'—he wasnot human．His only feelings at that time were fear and hate．Hyde was wholly evil，but he was not stupid．He knew thathis life depended on two letters，one to Lanyon and one toPoole．If he failed，he would die．
　　Carefully he wrote the letters and sent a servant to postthem．After that he sat all day by the fire in the private room．There too he had dinner，brought by a frightened waiter．Atlast，when darkness had covered the city，he sat in the cornerof a closed taxicab．'Just drive round！'he ordered，and thedriver drove backwards and forwards through the streets ofLondon．
　　Then，when Hyde thought the driver was beginning to sus-pect something，he sent the taxicab away and continued onfoot．He was a strange figure in his too-large clothes，withfear and hate staring out of his eyes．He walked along talkingto himself．Once a woman spoke to him 'Will you buy my matches，sir？'she begged．Hyde hit heracross the face，and she ran away in fear.
　　My plan was successful．And when I arrived in Lanyon's house，I took the dose of the drug that returned me to my nor-mal appearance．
　　Immediately afterwards I felt deeply ashamed．Perhaps itwas Lanyon's horror that made me feel like that.I do notknow．But I hated myself and I was conscious of an importantchange in my feelings．I was no longer afraid of the police-Iwas afraid of Hyde himself．The thought of his short，strong，hairy body and his evil，cruel，wholly selfish mind filled mewith horror．
　　Exhausted by the horrors of that day，I slept heavily．Iwoke in the morning feeling weak and shaky，but quitenormal．I still hated and feared the thought of the wild animalinside me，and I had not forgotten the desperate dangers of theday before．But I was at home and close to my drugs，and Iwas most deeply grateful for my escape．
　　I was walking across the garden after breakfast，enjoyingthe clear wintry air，when suddenly my body was again tornby those indescribable feelings which I always experienced af-ter a dose of the drug．I only just reached my study before Iwas again burning and freezing with the violent passions ofHyde．With feverish speed I mixed the drug．This time I hadto take a double dose to return to my old shape．And then，on-ly six hours later，the pains returned and I had to repeat thedose．
　　From that day onwards the situation worsened．I neededlarger and more frequent doses in order to stay in Jekyll's body．The pains came unexpectedly，but most of all when Iwas asleep．I was afraid to go to bed，or even to sleep for afew moments in my chair．If I did so，I always woke as Hyde．
　　Soon Jekyll was a sick man，feverish and weakened by painand fear．As Jekyll grew weaker，Hyde became stronger thanever．He burned with hate for everybody and everything．AndHyde and Jekyll now hated each other with equal passion．Jekyll hated Hyde because Hyde was evil and inhuman，andbecause Hyde was stronger than he was．Jekyll lived in fear ofwaking up and finding himself in Hyde's body，with allHyde's evil passions．Hyde hated Jekyll for a different reason．His fear of death-the punishment for murder-drove him tothe hiding-place of Jekyll's body．But he hated this prison andwas always fighting．to escape from Jekyll's mind and body，and take control．He also hated Jekyll's weakness and his sad，hopeless condition．Most of all,he hated Jekyll's dislike ofhim．This was why Hyde sometimes did things to annoyJekyll．He tore the doctor's books and wrote all over them.He burned his letters and even destroyed a picture of thedoctor's dead father．
　　Only Hyde's fear of his own death stops him from killingme．His love of life is terribly strong，and he knows that if hekills me，he too will die．I almost feel sorry for him．
　　It is useless to continue this confession．The final disasterhas arrived，and will put an end to my punishment．I shallsoon lose my own face and character for ever．I have only afew doses of the drug left．I sent Poole to the same chemist tofetch some more chemicals．When he brought them，I mixed adose of the drug．The liquid smoked and changed from red topurple，but it did not turn green．I drank it，and looked in themirror．But there was no effect．Edward Hyde's face stillstared back at me．
　　I expect Poole has told you that I have searched London forthe chemicals I need．It is no good．I have decided that thefirst chemicals I bought were not absolutely pure．By accident，they contained something unknown to myself or to the chemistthat prepared them．And that unknown something made mydrug effective．So my drug was an accidental discovery thatcannot be repeated．
　　About a week has passed．I have used the last of the oldchemicals，and for the moment I am Henry Jekyll again．But Icannot write much more-I have very little time．If Hyde re-turns while I am writing this confession，he will tear it topieces to annoy me．If I finish it，however，he will probablynot notice it．He lives only for the moment，and he is already achanged man．He is like a trapped animal now．He sits in mychair trembling and weeping with hate and fear．All the timehe listens for the policeman's knock at the door．Will he becaught at last，and put to death？Or will he be brave enough totake a dose of poison at the last moment？
　　Well，that is not my business．This is the true hour of mydeath．When you read this，the Henry Jekyll you know will bedead．The rest of the story is about Edward Hyde．Now，as Iput down my pen，I bring the life of unhappy Henry Jekyll toan end．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Great Expectations by Charles Dickens








■ 1 Pip meets a stranger
　　My first name was Philip，but when I was a small child I could only manage to say Pip．So Pip was what every-body called me．I lived in a small village in Essex with my sister，who was over twenty years older than me，and married to Joe Gargery，the village blacksmith．My parents had died when I was a baby，so I could not remember them at all，but quite often I used to visit the churchyard，abut a mile from the village，to look at their names on their gravestones．
　　My first memory is of sitting on a gravestone in that church-yard one cold，grey，December afternoon，looking out at the dark，flat，wild marshes divided by the black line of the River Thames，and listening to the rushing sound of the sea in the distance．
　　‘Don't say a word！’cried a terrible voice，as a man jumped up from among the graves and caught hold of me．‘If you shout I'll cut your throat！’He was a big man，dressed all in grey，with an iron chain on his leg．His clothes were wet and torn．He looked exhausted，and hungry，and very fierce．I had never been so frightened in my whole life．
　　‘Oh！Don't cut my throat，sir！’I begged in terror．
　　‘Tell me your name，boy！Quick！’he said，still holding me．‘And show me where you live！’
　　‘My name's Pip，sir．And I live in the village over there．’
　　He picked me up and turned me upside-down．Nothing fell out of my pocket except a piece of old bread．He ate it in two bites，like a dog，and put me back on the gravestone．
　　‘So where are your father and mother？’he asked．
　　‘There，sir，’I answered，pointing to their graves．
　　‘What！’he cried，and was about to run，when he saw where I was pointing．‘Oh！’he said．‘ I see．They're dead．Well，who do you live with，if I let you live，which I haven't decided yet？’
　　‘With my sister，sir，wife of Joe Gargery，the blacksmith．’
　　Blacksmith，you say？And he looked down at his leg．Then he held me by both arms and stared fiercely down into my eyes．
　　‘Now look here．You bring me a file．You know what that is？And you bring me some food．If you don't，or if you tell anyone about me，I'll cut your heart out．’
　　‘I promise I'll do it，sir，’I answered．I was badly fright ened and my whole body was trembling .
　　‘You see，’he continued，smiling unpleasantly，‘I travel with a young man，a friend of mine，who roasts boys’hearts and eats them．He'll find you，wherever you are，and he'll have your heart．So bring the file and the food to that wooden shelter over there，early tomorrow morning，if you want to keep your heart，that is Remember，you promised！’
　　I watched him turn and walk with difficulty across the marshes，the chain hanging clumsily around his leg．Then I ran home as fast as I could．
　　My sister，Mrs Joe Gargery，was very proud of the fact that she had brought me up‘by hand’．Nobody explained to me what this meant，and because she had a hard and heavy hand，which she used freely on her husband as well as me，I supposed that Joe and I were both brought up by hand．She was not a beautiful woman，being tall and thin，with black hair and eyes and a very red face．She clearly felt that Joe and I caused her a lot of trouble，and she frequently complained about it．Joe，on the other hand，was a gentle，kind man with fair hair and weak blue eyes，who quietly accepted her scolding．
　　Because Joe and I were in the same position of being scolded by Mrs Joe，we were good friends，and Joe protected me from her anger whenever he could．So when I ran breathless into the kitchen，he gave me a friendly warning．‘She's out look-ing for you，Pip！And she's got the stick with her！’This stick had been used so often for beating me that it was now quite smooth．
　　Just then Mrs Joe rushed in．
　　‘Where have you been，you young monkey？'she shouted．I jumped behind Joe to avoid being hit with the stick．
　　‘Only to the churchyard，’I whispered，starting to cry．
　　‘Churchyard！If I hadn't brought you up，you'd be in the churchyard with our parents．You'll send me to the church-yard one day！Now let me get your supper ready，both of you！’
　　For the rest of the evening，I thought of nothing but the stranger on the marshes．Sometimes，as the wind blew round the house，I imagined I heard his voice outside，and I thought with horror of the young man who ate boys’ hearts．
　　Just before I went to bed，we heard the sound of a big gun on the marshes．‘Was that a gun，Joe？’I asked．
　　‘Ah！'said Joe．‘Another convict's escaped．One got away last night．They always fire the gun when one escapes．’
　　‘Who fires the gun？’I asked．Joe shook his head to warn me．
　　‘Too many questions，’frowned my sister．‘If you must know it's the men in the prison-ships who fire the gun．’
　　‘I wonder who is put into prison-ships，and why？’I asked，in a general way，quietly desperate to know the answer．
　　This was too much for Mrs Joe．‘Listen，my boy，I didn't bring you up by hand to annoy people to death！There are ships on the river which are used as prisons．People who steal and murder are put in the prison-ships，and they stay there for years sometimes．And they always begin their life of crime by asking too many questions！Now，go to bed！’
　　I could not sleep at all that night．I was in terror of the young man who wanted my heart，I was in terror of the man with the iron chain，I was in terror of my sister，who would soon discover I had stolen her food．As soon as there was a lit-tle light in the sky outside my window， I got up and went qui-etly down to the kitchen．I stole some bread，cheese and a big meat pie，hoping that，as there was a lot of food ready for Christmas，nobody would notice what was missing．I did not dare take the whole brandy bottle，so I poured some into a smaller bottle to take away with me．Then I filled up the brandy bottle with what I thought was water from a big brown bottle．I took a file from Joe's box of tools，and ran out on to the dark marshes．
　　The mist was so thick that I could not see anything．Al-though I knew my way to the shelter very well，I almost got lost this time．I was near it when I saw a man sitting on the ground，half asleep．I went up and touched his shoulder．He jumped up，and it was the wrong man！He was dressed in grey，too，and had an iron chain on his leg．He ran away into the mist．
　　‘It's the young man！’I thought，feeling a pain in my heart．
　　When I arrived at the shelter，I found the right man．He looked so cold and hungry that I felt sorry for him．Trembling violently he swallowed the brandy and ate the food like a hunt-ed animal，looking around him all the time for danger．
　　‘You're sure you didn't tell anyone？Or bring anyone？’
　　‘No，sir．I'm glad you're enjoying the food，sir．’
　　‘Thank you，my boy．You've been good to a poor man．’
　　‘But I'm afraid there won't be any left for him．’
　　‘Him？ Who's that？’My friend stopped in the middle of eating．
　　‘The young man who travels with you．’
　　‘Oh，him！’he replied，smiling．‘He doesn't want any food．’
　　‘I thought he looked rather hungry，’I answered．
　　He stared at me in great surprise．‘Looked？When？’
　　‘Just now，over there．I found him half asleep and I thought it was you．He was dressed like you，and—’I was anxious to express this politely‘-he had the same reason for wanting to borrow a file．’
　　‘Then I did hear them fire the gun last night！You know，boy，when you're on the marsh alone at night，you imagine all kinds of things，voices calling，guns firing，soldiers marching！But show me where this man went．I'll find him and I'll fin-ish with him！I'll smash his face！Give me the file first．’
　　I was afraid of him now that he was angry again．
　　‘I'm sorry，I must go home now，’I said．He did not seem to hear，so I left him bending over his leg and filing away at his iron chain like a madman．Halfway home I stopped in the mist to listen，and I could still hear the sound of the file．






■ 2 Catching a convict
　　All that morning I was frightened that my sister would discover that I had stolen from her，but luckily she was so busy cleaning the house，and roasting the chickens for our Christmas lunch that she did not notice that I had been out，or that any food was missing．At half-past one our two guests arrived．Mr Wopsle had a large nose and a shining，bald forehead，and was the church clerk．Mr Pumblechook， who had a shop in the nearest town，was a fat，middle-aged man witn a mouth like a fish，and staring eyes．He was really Joe's uncle but it was Mrs Joe who called him uncle．Every Christmas Day he arrived with two bottles of wine，handing them proudly to my sister．
　　‘Oh Uncle Pumblechook！This is kind！'she always replied．
　　‘It's no more than you deserve，’was the answer every time．
　　Sitting at table with these guests I would have felt uncomfortable even if I hadn't robbed my sister．Not only was Pumblechook's elbow in my eye，but I wasn't allowed to speak，and they gave me the worst pieces of meat．Even the chickens must have been ashamed of those parts of their bodies when they were alive．And worse than that，the adults never left me in peace．
　　‘Before we eat，let us thank God for the food in front of us，'said Mr Wopsle，in the deep voice he used in church．
　　‘Do you hear that？’whispered my sister to me．‘Be grateful！’
　　‘Especially，'said Mr Pumblechook firmly，‘be grateful，boy，to those who brought you up by hand．’
　　‘Why are the young never grateful？’wondered Mr Wopsle sadly．
　　‘Their characters are naturally bad，’answered Mr Pumblechook，and all three looked unpleasantly at me．
　　When there were guests，Joe's position was even lower than usual（if that was possible），but he always tried to help me if he could．Sometimes he comforted me by giving me extra gravy．He did that now．
　　‘Just imagine，boy，'said Mr Pumblechook，‘if your sister hadn't brought you up—’
　　‘You listen to this，'said my sister to me crossly．
　　‘If，as I say，she hadn't spent her life looking after you，where would you be now？’
　　Joe offered me more gravy．
　　‘He was a lot of trouble to you，madam，’Mr Wopsle said sympathetically to my sister．
　　‘Trouble？'she cried．‘Trouble？’And then she started on a list of all my illnesses，accidents and crimes，while everybody except Joe looked at me with disgust．Joe added more gravy to the meat swimming on my plate，and I wanted to pull Mr Wopsle's nose．
　　In the end Mrs Joe stopped for breath，and said to Mr Pumblechook，‘Have a little brandy，uncle．There is a bottle al-ready open．’
　　It had happened at last！Now she would discover I had stolen some brandy，and put water in the bottle．Mr Pumblechook held his glass up to the light，smiled importantly at it and drank it．When，immediately afterwards，he jumped up and began to rush round the room in a strange wild dance，we all stared at him in great surprise．Was he mad？I wondered if I had murdered him，but if so，how？At last he threw himself gasping into a chair，crying ‘Medicine！’Then I understood．Instead of filling up the brandy bottle with water，I had put Mrs Joe's strongest and most unpleasant medicine in by mistake．That was what the big brown bottle contained．
　　‘But how could my medicine get into a brandy bottle？’asked my sister．Fortunately she had no time to find the answer，as Mr Pumblechook was calling for a hot rum to remove the taste of the medicine．‘And now，'she said，when the fat man was calmer，‘you must all try Uncle Pumblechook's pre-sent to us！A really delicious meat pie！’
　　‘That's right，Mrs Joe！'said Mr Pumblechook，looking more cheerful now．‘ Bring in the pie！’
　　‘You shall have some，Pip，'said Joe kindly．
　　I knew what would happen next．I could not sit there any longer．I jumped down from the table，and ran out of the room．
　　But at the front door I ran straight into a group of soldiers．Mrs Joe was saying as she came out of the kitchen，‘The pie-has-gone！’but stopped when she saw the soldiers．
　　‘Excuse me，ladies and gentlemen，'said the officer in charge．‘I'm here in the King's name，and I want the black-smith．’
　　‘And why do you want him？'said my sister crossly．
　　‘Madam，’replied the officer Politely，‘speaking for myself，I'd like the pleasure of meeting his fine wife．Speaking for the King，I'd like him to repair these handcuffs．’
　　‘Ah，very good，very good！’ said Mr Pumblechook，clap-ping．
　　The soldiers waited in the kitchen while Joe lit the forge fire and started work．I began to feel better now that everyone had forgotten the missing pie．
　　‘How far are we from the marshes？’asked the officer．
　　‘About a mile，’replied Mrs Joe．
　　‘ That's good．We'll catch them before it's dark．’
　　‘ Convicts，officer？’asked Mr Wopsle．
　　‘Yes，two escaped convicts out on the marshes．Has anyone here seen them？’
　　The others all shook their heads．Nobody asked me．When the handcuffs were ready，Joe suggested we should go with the soldiers，and as Mrs Joe was curious to know what happened，she agreed．So Joe，Mr wopsle and I walked behind the men through the village and out on to the marshes．
　　‘ I hope we don't find those poor men，Joe，’I whispered．
　　‘ I hope not either，Pip，’he whispered back．It was cold，with an east wind blowing from the sea，and it was getting dark．
　　Suddenly we all stopped．We heard shouts in the distance．
　　‘This way！Run！’the officer ordered，and we all rushed in that direction．The shouts became clearer．‘ Murder！’‘Escaped convict！’‘Help！’At last we discovered two men fighting each other．One was my convict，and the other was the man who had run away when I had seen him near the shelter．Somehow the soldiers held the men apart and put the hand-cuffs on them．
　　‘Here he is，I'm holding him for you！'shouted my convict．
　　‘Officer，he tried to murder me！’cried the other man．His face was bleeding and he was clearly very frightened．
　　‘ Murder him！No，'said the first，‘ that would be too easy．I want him to suffer more，back on the prison-ship．He's lying，as he did at our trial！You can't trust Compeyson！’
　　Just then he noticed me for the first time．I shook my head at him，to show that I had not wanted the soldiers to find him．He stared at me，but I did not know if he understood or not．
　　The prisoners were taken to the riverside，where a boat was waiting to take them on to the prison-ship．Just as he was about to leave，my convict said，‘Officer，after my escape，I stole some food，from the blacksmith's house．Bread，cheese，brandy and a meat pie．I'm sorry I ate your pie，blacksmith．’
　　‘I'm glad you did，’replied Joe kindly．‘ We don't know why you're a convict，but we wouldn't want you to die of hunger．’
　　The man rubbed his eyes with the back of his dirty hand．We watched the small boat carry him out to the middle of the river，where the great black prison-ship stood high out of the water，held by its rusty chains．He disappeared into the ship，and I thought that was the last I had seen of him．






■ 3 An opportunity for Pip
　　I always knew I would be apprenticed to Joe as soon as I was old enough，and so I used to spend most of the day helping him in the forge．However，I also attended the village evening school，which was organized by an ancient relation of Mr Wopsle's．Her teaching mostly consisted of falling asleep while we children fought each other，but Mr Wopsle's young cousin，Biddy，tried to keep us under control and teach us to read，write and count．Mr Wopsle‘examined’us every three months．In fact he did not ask us any questions at all，but read aloud from Shakespeare，waving his arms dramatically and enjoying the sound of his own voice．
　　One night，about a year after the escaped convicts had been caught，I was sitting by the kitchen fire，writing a letter to Joe．I didn't need to，because he was sitting right next to me，but I wanted to practise my writing．After an hour or two of hard work，I passed this letter to him．
　　‘Pip，old boy！’cried Joe，opening his kind blue eyes very wide．‘What a lot you've learnt！Here's a J and an O，that's for Joe，isn't it，Pip？’
　　I wondered whether I would have to teach Joe from the beginning，so I asked，‘How do you write Gargery，Joe？’
　　‘I don't write it at all，'said Joe．‘But，you know，I am fond of reading．Give me a good book or newspaper，a good fire and I ask no more．Well！When you come to a J and an O，how interesting reading is！’
　　‘ Didn't you ever go to school，Joe，when you were young？’
　　‘No，Pip．You see，my father drank a lot，and when he drank，he used to hit my mother，and me too，sometimes．So she and I ran away from him several times．And she used to say，“Now，Joe，you can go to school．”But my father had such a good heart that he didn't want to be without us．So he always came to find us，and took us home，and hit us．So you see，Pip，I never learnt much．’
　　‘Poor Joe！’
　　‘But remember，Pip，my father had a good heart．’
　　I wondered about that，but said nothing．
　　‘He let me become a blacksmith，which was his job too，only he never worked at it．I earned the money for the family，until he died．And listen to this，Pip，I wanted to put this on his gravestone：
　　Whatever the fault he had from the start，
　　Remember，reader，he had a good heart．’
　　‘ Did you invent that yourself，Joe？’I asked，surprised .
　　‘I did，'said Joe proudly．‘It came to me in a moment．From my own head．But，Pip，sad to say，there wasn't enough money for the gravestone．My poor mother needed it．In bad health，she was．She died soon after．Found peace at last．’Joe's blue eyes were watery．‘I was lonely then，and I met your sister．Now，Pip，’Joe looked firmly at me，because he knew I was not going to agree with him，‘your sister is a fine woman！’
　　I could think of nothing better to say than‘I'm glad you think so，Joe．’
　　‘ So am I，'said Joe．‘I'm glad I think so．Very kind of her，bringing you up by hand．Such a tiny baby you were！So when I offered to marry your sister，I said，“And bring the poor little child to live with us．There's room for him at the forge！”’
　　I put my arms round Joe's neck and cried into his shirt．
　　‘Don't cry，old boy！’he said．‘Always the best of friends，you and me！’ As I dried my tears，he continued，‘So here we are，Pip！Now if you teach me a bit（and I warn you now that I'm very stupid）Mrs Joe must never know．And why？Because she likes to be-in charge-you know-giving the orders．’
　　‘Joe，’I asked，‘why don't you ever rebel？’
　　‘Well，'said Joe，‘ to start with，your sister's clever．And I'm not．And another thing，and this is serious，old boy，when I think of my poor mother's hard life，I'm afraid of not behaving right to a woman．So I'd much rather seem a bit weak with Mrs Joe than shout at her，or hurt her，or hit her．I'm just sorry she scolds you as well，Pip，and hits you with the stick．I wish I could take all the scolding myself．But there it is，Pip．’
　　Just then we heard the sound of a horse on the road．Mrs Joe and Uncle Pumblechook were returning from market．The carriage arrived，and in a rush of cold air，they were in the kitchen．
　　‘Now，'said Mrs Joe，excitedly throwing off her cloak，‘if this boy isn't grateful tonight，he never will be！’
　　‘She's offering the boy a great opportunity，’agreed Pumblechook．Trying to look grateful，I looked at Joe，making the word‘She？’with my lips．He clearly did not know either．
　　‘You were speaking of a she？’he said Politely to them．
　　‘She is a she，I suppose，’Mrs Joe replied crossly．‘Unless you call Miss Havisham a he．And even you wouldn't do that．’
　　‘The rich Miss Havisham who lives all alone in the big house in town？’asked Joe．
　　‘There aren't any other Miss Havishams that I know of！She wants a boy to go and play there．She asked Uncle Pumblechook if he knew of anyone．And Uncle Pumblechook，thinking of us as he always does，suggested this boy．And what's more，Uncle Pumblechook，realizing that this boy's fortune may be made by going to Miss Havisham's，has of-fered to take him into town tonight in his carriage，and let him sleep in his own house，and deliver him tomorrow to Miss Havisham's．And just look！'she cried，catching hold of me．‘Look at the dirt on this by！’
　　I was washed from top to toe in Mrs Joe's usual violent manner，and handed over，in my tightest Sunday clothes，to Mr Pumblechook．In the carriage taking me into town，I cried a little．I had never been away from Joe before，and I had no idea what was going to happen to me at Miss Havisham's．
　　Mr Pumblechook seemed to agree with my sister that I should be punished as much as possible，even when eating，and so for breakfast next morning he gave me a large piece of bread with very little butter，and a cup of warm water with very little milk，and insisted on checking my learning．
　　‘What's seven and thirteen，boy？’He continued testing me all through breakfast．‘And nine？And eleven？’
　　So I was glad to arrive at Miss Havisham's house at about ten o’clock．It was a large house，made of old stone，and with iron bars on the windows．We rang the bell，and waited at the gate．Even then Mr Pumblechook said，‘And fourteen？’but I pretended not to hear him．Then a young lady came to open the gate，and let me in．Mr Pumblechook was following me when she stopped him．
　　‘Do you wish to see Miss Havisham？'she asked．
　　‘If Miss Havisham wishes to see me，’answered Mr Pumblechook，a little confused．
　　‘Ah！'said the girl，‘but you see，she doesn't．’
　　Mr Pumblechook dared not protest but he whispered angrily to me before he turned away，‘Boy！Behave well here and re-member those who brought you up by hand！’I thought he would come back and call through the gate，‘And sixteen？’but he did not．
　　The young lady took me through the untidy garden to the house．Although she called me ‘boy，'she was the same age as me，but she seemed much older than me．She was beautiful，and as proud as a queen．We went through many dark passages until we reached a door，where she left me，taking her candle with her．
　　I knocked at the door and was told to enter．I found myself in a large room，where the curtains were closed to allow no daylight in，and the candles were lit．In the centre of the room，sitting at a table，was the strangest lady I have ever seen，or shall ever see．She was wearing a wedding dress made of rich material．She had a bride's flowers in her hair，but her hair was white．There were suitcases full of dresses and Jewels around her，ready for a journey．She only had one white shoe on．‘Then I realized that over the years the white wedding dress had become yellow，and the flowers in her hair had died，and the bride inside the dress had grown old．Everything in the room was ancient and dying．The only brightness in the room was in her dark old eyes，that stared at me．
　　‘Who are you？'said the lady at the table．
　　‘Pip，madam．Mr Pumblechook's boy．Come-to play．’
　　‘Come close．Let me look at you．’As I stood in front of ＊her，I noticed that her watch and a clock in the room had both stopped at twenty minutes to nine．
　　‘You aren't afraid of a woman who has never seen the sun since you were born？’asked Miss Havisham．
　　I am sorry to say I told a huge lie by saying，‘No．’
　　‘Do you know what ths is？'she asked，putting her hand on her left side．
　　‘Yes，madam．’It made me think of my convict's travel-ling companion．‘Your heart，madam，’I added．
　　‘My heart！Broken！'she cried almost proudly，with a strange smile．Then she said，‘I am tired．I want to see some-thing different．Play．’
　　No order could be more difficult to obey in that house and that room．I was desperate enough to consider rushing round the table pretending to be Pumblechook's carriage，but I could not make myself do it，and just stood there helplessly．
　　‘I'm very sorry，madam，’I said，‘my sister will be very angry with me if you complain，but I can't play just now．Everything is so strange，and new，and sad…’I stopped，afraid to say more．Miss Havisham looked down at her dress，and then at her face in the mirror on the table．
　　‘So strange to him，so well-known to me，'she whispered．
　　‘So new to him，so old to me．And so sad to us both！Call Es-tella！’
　　When Estella finally came，with her candle，along the dark passage，Miss Havisham picked up a jewel from her table and put it in Estella's hair．‘Very pretty，my dear．It will be yours one day．Now let me see you play cards with this boy．’
　　‘With this boy！But he's a common working boy！’
　　I thought I heard Miss Havisham whisper，‘Well！You can break his heart！'she sat，like a dead body ready for the grave，watching us play cards in the candle-light．I almost wondered if she was afraid that daylight would turn her into dust．
　　‘What coarse hands this boy has！And what thick boots！’cried Estella in disgust，before we had finished our first game．I was suddenly aware that what she said was true．
　　‘What do you think of her？’ Whispered Miss Havisham to me．
　　‘I think she's very proud，’I whispered back．
　　‘Anything else？’
　　‘I think she's very pretty．’
　　‘Anything else？’
　　‘I think she's very rude．And-and I'd like to go home．’
　　‘And never see her again，although she's so pretty？’
　　‘I don't know．I'd-I'd like to go home now．’
　　Miss Havisham smiled．‘You can go home．Come again in six days'time．Estella，give him some food．GO，Pip．’
　　And so I found myself back in the overgrown garden in the bright daylight．Estella put some bread and meat down on the ground for me，like a dog．I was so offended by her behaviour towards me that tears came to my eyes．As soon as she saw this，She gave a delighted laugh，and pushed me out of the gate．I walked the four miles home to the forge，thinking about all I had seen．As I looked sadly at my hands and boots，I remembered that I was only a common working boy，and wished I could be different．
　　My sister was curious to know all the details of my visit，and kept asking me question after question．Somehow I felt I could not，or did not want to，explain about Miss Havisham and her strange house．I knew my sister would not understand．And the worst of it was，that old fool Pumblechook arrived at tea-time，to ask more questions．Just looking at his fishy staring eyes and open mouth made me want to keep silent．
　　‘Leave this boy to me，madam，’he told Mrs Joe．‘I'll make him concentrate．Now，boy，what's forty-three and seventy-two？’
　　‘I don't know，’I said．I didn't care，either．
　　‘Is it eighty-five，for example？’he joked．
　　‘Yes！’I answered，although I knew it wasn't．My sister hit me hard on the head．
　　‘Boy！’he continued．‘Describe Miss Havisham．’
　　‘Very tall and dark，’I said，lying．
　　‘Is she，uncle？’asked my sister eagerly．
　　‘Oh yes，’answered Mr Pumblechook．So I knew immediately that he had never seen her．‘This is the way to get information from this boy，’he added quietly to Mrs Joe．
　　‘How well you make him obey you，uncle！'said Mrs Joe．
　　‘ Now，boy！What was she doing when you arrived？’
　　‘She was sitting in a black carriage，’I replied．
　　Mr Pumblechook and Mrs Joe stared at each other．‘In a black carriage？’they repeated．
　　‘Yes，’I said，becoming more confident．‘And Miss Estella，her niece，I think，handed in gold plates with cake and wine through the windows．
　　‘Was anybody else there？’asked Mr Pumblechook．
　　‘Four dogs，huge ones．They ate meat out of a silver basket．’
　　‘Where was this carriage，boy？’
　　‘In her room．But there weren't any horses．’
　　‘Can this be possible，uncle？’asked Mrs Joe．
　　‘She's a strange woman，madam．It's quite possible．What did you play at，boy？’
　　We played with flags，’I answered．What lies I was telling！‘Estella waved a blue one，and I had a red one，and Miss Havisham waved one with little gold stars on，out of the carriage window．’
　　Fortunately they asked no more questions，and were still discussing the wonderful things I had seen，when Joe came in from the forge．When I saw his blue eyes open wide in surprise，I felt very sorry I had lied，and that evening，as soon as I found Joe alone for a moment，I confessed to him that I had lied about my visit to Miss Havisham．
　　‘Is none of it true，Pip？’he asked，shocked．‘No black carriage 
 But at least there were dogs， weren't there，Pip？No？Not even one dog？’
　　‘No，Joe，I'm sorry．’
　　‘Pip，old boy！’His kind face looked very unhappy．‘If you tell lies，where do you think you'll go when you die？’
　　‘I know，Joe，it's terrible．I don't know what happened．Oh I wish I didn't have such thick boots and such coarse hands！I'm so miserable，Joe．That beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham's said I was common．And I know I am！Somehow that made me tell lies．’ ‘One thing to remember，Pip，’ said Joe，lighting his pipe slowly，‘is that lies are always wrong．You can't stop being common by telling lies．That's not the way to do it．And you're learning all the time，Pip！Look at that letter you wrote me last night！Even the King had to start learning at the beginning, didn't he？That reminds me，any flags at Miss Havisham's？No？That's a pity．Look here，Pip，this is a true friend speaking to you．Take my advice．No more lies，live well, and die happy.’
　　Encouraged by Joe's honest words I went to bed，but I couldn't stop myself thinking that Estella would consider Joe's boots too thick and his hands too coarse，and our whole family common．That was a day I shall never forget．






■ 4 A present from a stranger
　　I desperately wanted to be accepted by Estella．I realized I could never become well-educated just by attending old Mrs Wopsle's evening school，so I asked Mr Wopsle's cousin Biddy to teach me everything she knew．She helped me as much as she could，but I knew it would take a long time to reach Estella's level．
　　One evening I went to fetch Joe from the village pub, where my sister sometimes allowed him to smoke his pipe and have a beer．Mr Wopsle and Joe were sitting with a stranger，a man I'd never seen before．One of his eyes was half closed,and he wore a big hat which covered most of his head．He suddenly looked interested when I arrived，and rubbed his leg in a rather strange way．He had just ordered hot rum for the three of them．
　　‘It' s lonely country round here，gentlemen，’he said．‘Yes，'said Joe，‘just marshes down to the river．’
　　Do people ever spend the night on the marshes？’
　　‘No，’‘replied Joe，‘except an escaped prisoner sometimes．Difficult to find，they are．Went out to look for one once，me，and Mr Wopsle，and young Pip here．Didn't we，Pip？’
　　‘Yes，Joe.’
　　The stranger looked at me with his good eye．
　　‘What's his name？Pip？Your son，is he？’
　　‘The boy is the blacksmith's wife's brother，’explained Mr Wopsle in his official church clerk's voice．
　　When the drinks arrived，the stranger did something that he wanted nobody to see except me. He mixed his hot rum and water，not with a spoon，but with a file，which he put back in his pocket when he had finished．As soon as I saw the file，I knew it was the one I had stolen from Joe，and I knew that this man knew my convict. I stared at him in horror.
　　The men continued their conversation in a friendly way until Joe stood up to leave，and took my hand．
　　‘Wait a moment，'I said the stranger．‘I'd like to give the boy something，'and wrapping a coin in some old paper from his pocket，handed it to me. ‘That' s yours！he told me，giving me a look full of meaning .
　　‘Thank you，sir，'I said，still staring at him．Together Joe and I walked home，Joe with his mouth open all the way so that my sister would not notice the smell of rum on his breath .
　　But when we arrived home，we found the stranger had giv-en me two Pound notes as well as the coin．My sister thought it must have been a mistake，and kept the pound notes in case he came back for them．But I knew they came from my con－vict，and I felt that having criminal friends made me more common than ever.
　　The next time I went to Miss Havisham's，I was shown in－to a different room to wait. Several ladies and gentlemen，relations of hers，were there. They all turned and looked at me in disgust when I was the first to be called by Estella．
　　As Estella was leading me along the dark passages，she stopped suddenly and put her face close to mine．
　　‘Look at me，boy！Am I pretty？'
　　‘Yes，I think you're very pretty．'
　　‘Am I rude to you？'
　　‘Not as much as last time．'
　　She hit my face as hard as she could.
　　‘Now，you coarse little boy，what do you think of me？’
　　‘I won't tell you．’
　　‘Why don't you cry again，you fool？'
　　‘Because I'll never cry for you again，'I said，which was a very false promise，because I was crying inside at the time，and only I know how much I cried for her later．
　　On our way upstairs we met a gentleman coming down in the dark．He was a large，heavy man，with a very dark skin，sharp eyes，and a huge head，almost bald on the top．His hands smelt strongly of perfumed soap．I didn't know then how important he would ha later on in my life. ‘Who's this？’he asked Estella，stopping to look at me. ‘A local boy. Miss Havisham sent for him，'she replied． ‘Well，in my experience most boys are bad，'he said to me.‘Behave yourself！'He bit the side of his large finger as he frowned at me，and then continued downstairs.
　　This time Miss Havisham was in another room，which I had not seen before．All the furniture was covered in dust．In the candle－light I could see a long table，in the middle of which was a large yellow shape，with hundreds of insects feeding off it．
　　‘This，'said Miss Havisham，pointing to the table，‘is where they will put me when I'm dead． I'll lie on the table，and my relations can come and look at me．' She put a bony hand on my shoulder，but I didn't want her to touch me．I was afraid she would die there and then．‘And that，'she added，pointing to the yellow shape，‘that was my wedding cake．Mine！'she looked all round the room angrily．‘Come！'she said suddenly．‘Help me walk round the room．And call Estella！’
　　I held her arm to support her as she walked．We were still going slowly and painfully round the room when Estella brought in the relations who had been waiting downstairs．They stood watching us at the door．I thought they blamed me for Miss Havisham's cold manner towards them．
　　‘Dear Miss Havisham！'said one of the ladies lovingly．‘How well you look！’
　　‘I do not，’replied Miss Havisham sharply．‘I am yellow skin and bone．'
　　‘How could Miss Havisham look well，after all her suffer－ing？'said a second lady quickly．‘ Impossible！What a silly idea！’
　　‘ And how are you？’Miss Havisham asked this lady．As we were close to her then，I would have stopped，but Miss Havisham insisted on walking past .It seemed rather rude．
　　‘Not well at all，'said this lady sadly.‘I don't want to talk too much about my feelings，but－well－I often lie awake at night thinking of you，dear Miss Havisham！'
　　‘Well，don't！'said Miss Havisham crossly as we hurried past the little group again.
　　‘I'm afraid I can't stop myself．I often wish I were less sensitive and loving . But that's my character and I have to live with it！'And she started crying softly．‘Look at Matthew now！'she added，through her tears.‘Matthew never comes to see dear Miss Havisham .But I-’
　　When she heard Matthew's name，Miss Havisham stopped walking and stood looking at the speaker，who suddenly became silent. ‘Matthew will come in the end，'said Miss Havisham firmly，‘when I die and am laid on that table. You will stand around and look at me，you here，you there，you next to her，you two there Now you know where to stand．And now go！'
　　The ladies and gentlemen went slowly out of the room，some protesting quietly that they had not seen enough of their dear relation. When they had all gone，Miss Havisham said to me，
　　‘This is my birthday，Pip．I don't allow anyone to speak of it．My relations always come on this day once a year．This day，long before you were born，was my wedding day .Pehaps I shall die on this day too．And when they lay me in my wedding dress on that table，I'll have my revenge on him！’
　　In the heavy air of that dark，dusty room，she was a ghostly figure in her yellow－white dress．There was a long silence．
　　As usual I left the house and walked towards the gate， but this time something strange happened．In the garden I met a pale young gentleman with fair hair．
　　‘Hello！’he said．‘Come and fight！This way！’
　　I was so surprised that I followed him without a word．
　　‘Wait a minute，’he said，turning round quickly．‘I must give you a reason for fighting．There it is！’And he pulled my hair，then pushed his head hard into my stomach．I was ready to fight him after this，but he danced abut so much that I couldn't get close to bim．
　　‘Follow the laws of the game！’he said，eagerly preparing himself for our fight．He seemed to know so much about fighting that I was very surprised when I knocked him down with my first hit，and then again with my second．He always got up immediately and seemed very glad to be fighting in the correct manner．I admired him greatly for his bravery and his cheerfulness．Finally he had to agree I had won，and we said goodbye． When I reached the gate，I found Estella waiting for me．She seemed very pleased about something．I wondered if she had been watching our fight．Before I went out，she said，
　　‘Here！you can kiss me if you like．’
　　I kissed her cheek．It was true I wanted to kiss her very much，but I felt that kiss was almost like a coin thrown to a poor common boy，and not worth anything．
　　I didn't see the pale young gentleman there again．I continued my visits to Miss Havisham for almost a year．She took great pleasure in watching my growing admiration for Estella，and my unhappiness when Estella laughed at me．
　　‘Go on，my love，she used to whisper in Estella's ear，‘break men's hearts and have no mercy！I want my revenge！'
　　Meanwhile my sister and that fool Pumblechook never stopped discussing Miss Havisham and her considerable wealth．They were sure I could expect a large present from her，either before or after her death．But one day Miss Havisham decided it was time to apprentice me to Joe，and told me to bring him to her house．My sister was very angry because she was not invited as well．
　　Dear old Joe simply could not believe his eyes when he and I entered Miss Havisham s room the next day．The darkness，the candles，the dust，the ancient furniture，the old lady in her bride's dress－it was almost too much for Joe's limited intelligence．That may be why he refused to speak to Miss Havisham directly，but spoke only to me during the conversation．I was ashamed of him，especially as I could see Estella laughing at me over Miss Havisham's shoulder．
　　‘So，’began Miss Havisham，‘you，Joe Gargery，black－smith，are ready to take Pip as an apprentice？'
　　‘You know，Pip，’replied Joe，‘how we've both been looking forward to working together．Haven't we，Pip？'
　　‘You don't expect any payment when he becomes your ap－prentice？'she continued．
　　‘Now，Pip，'said Joe，rather offended，‘that question doesn't need an answer. Between you and me. Does it，Pip？’
　　Miss Havisham looked kindly at Joe. I think she understood more of his character than Estella did．She picked up a little bag from the table．‘Pip has earned something here．There are twenty-five pounds in this bag .Give it to your master， Pip．'
　　The strange situation seemed to have made Joe go mad.Even now，he insisted on speaking to me．
　　This is very generous of you，Pip．Very generous．Now，old boy，we must try to do our duty to each other Mustn't we，Pip？’
　　‘Goodbye，Pip！'said Miss Havisham．‘Take them out，Estella！’
　　‘Shall I come again？I asked．
　　‘No，Gargery is your master now. Gargery！Remember，I'm giving you this money because he has been a good boy．Don't expect anything more！’
　　Somehow I managed to get Joe out of the house，and in the daylight he gradually became normal again．In fact I think his intelligence was improved by the interview，because as we walked home he invented a surprisingly clever plan．
　　‘Well，'cried my sister，as we arrived，‘so you've finished visiting your fine ladies，have you？ I'm surprised you bother to come home at all！’
　　‘Miss Havisham asked me to send，'said Joe，as if trying to remember the exact words，‘her-best wishes，was it，Pip？to Mrs J．Gargery…'
　　‘Best wishes，'I agreed．
　　‘And apologized for not being well enough，what was it，Pip？’
　　‘To have the pleasure，'I said．
　　‘To have the pleasure of a lady 's company，’he nodded，giving the impression of a man glad to pass on a message ocr－rectly .
　　‘Well！'said my sister，pleased．‘She could have sent that message earlier，but better late than never．And what did she give the boy？’
　　‘Nothing，'said Joe firmly，stopping Mrs Joe from speaking by raising his hand．‘What she gave，she gave to his sister，Mrs J．Gargery．That' s what she said．Didn't she，Pip？’
　　‘And how much did she give？asked my sister，laughing．She was actually laughing！
　　‘What would you say to ten pounds？’ asked Joe．
　　‘Not bad，'said my sister．
　　‘It's more than that．What would you say to twenty pounds？’ ‘That's good！'said my sister， ‘Well，here you are，it s twenty-five pounds！'said Joe de－lightedly，handing the bag to my sister．






■ 5 Pip's sister is attacked
　　I n a single year everything had changed．Before I went to Miss Havisham 's and met Estella，I had always wanted to be apprenticed to Joe，and I had always been happy at home，in spite of my sister' s scolding．Now I was ashamed of my home and my work．I was very miserable．Because of Joe，however，I stayed at the forge and did my best to work hard .I'm glad that I never told him how unhappy I was then. I tried to follow his example and become an honest，happy，hardworking man．But all the time I thought of Estella．My worst fear was that one day she would come to the forge and see me working as a common blacksmith，with black face and hands．She would certainly turn away in disgust．
　　In the evenings I studied as hard as I could，educating my-self for Estella．Whatever I learnt，I shared with Joe，not，I'm afraid，so that he would be more educated，but so that I would be less ashamed of him in front of Estella．One Sunday Joe and I went out on the marshes，as usual，to study together．I don't think he ever remembered anything from one week to the next，but he smoked his pipe comfortably，looking as intelli－gent as he could . I had a question I had been intending to ask him．
　　‘Joe,do you think I should visit Miss Havisham again？’
　　‘Well，Pip，'said Joe，‘will she think you expect her to give you something？ She told me she wouldn't give you any－thing else．'
　　‘But，Joe， I've been apprenticed nearly a year now，and I've never thanked her！’
　　‘That's true，Pip，'said Joe slowly．
　　‘Could you give me a half day's holiday tomorrow，Joe？ I would like to visit Miss Est-Havisham．'
　　‘Her name isn't Estavisham，as far as I know，Pip，'said Joe very seriously．
　　‘I know，Joe！Please，Joe！’
　　‘All right，Pip，but if she isn't happy to see you， better not go again .'
　　Joe had another blacksmith working for him at the forge．His name was Orlick，and he had no friends or family in the village.He was a big，strong，lazy man，who moved about in a strangely unhurried way，his shoulders bent and his eyes on the ground .For some reason he never liked me，even when I was a child， and when I became Joe's apprentice，he seemed to hate me．When he heard about my half-day holiday，he threw down his hammer angrily .
　　‘Come now，master！'he said to Joe. ‘ If young Pip 's having a holiday，give me one too！'
　　‘Well，’nodded Joe after thinking for a moment，‘I will．'
　　Just then my sister，who had secretly been listening outside the forge，called to Joe through one of the windows，‘You fool！You think you' re a rich man，giving a holiday to a lazy man like that Orlick！I wish I were his master！I'd soon show him！’ ‘You want to be everybody's master！' Orlick told her angrily．‘And what's more， you're a wicked, ugly，old woman！'
　　‘What did you say？' cried my sister，beginning to scream.‘Oh！Oh！What did you call me？ Hold me，someone！’Little by little she was deliberately making herself angry．Joe and I had seen this happen many times before．
　　‘Hold you！'said Orlick in disgust．‘If you were my wife，I'd hold you tight round the neck until you couldn't breathe！'
　　‘Oh！'screamed my sister．‘Me，a married woman！Being spoken to like this！In my own house！And my husband standing nearby！Oh！Oh！’And like a mad woman she pulled her hair loose，and rushed at the forge door，which I had，luckily，locked.
　　Poor Joe had no choice． He had to challenge Orlick to fight．But Joe was the strongest man in the village，and very soon Orlick，like the pale young gentleman，was lying on the ground .Then Joe unlocked the door and picked up my sister, who had dropped unconscious to the ground，but only after watching the fight through the window． She stayed in the kitchen for the rest of the day，and Joe and Orlick shared a glass of beer peacefully together in the forge．
　　That afternoon when I arrived at Miss Havisham's house，it wasn't Estella who opened the gate，but a cousin of the old lady's．Miss Havisham looked just the same as before．
　　‘Well？'she said，‘I hope you don't expect me to give you anything．’ ‘No，indeed，Miss Havisham．I only want you to know that I'm very grateful to you for helping me become Joe's apprentice. ‘Good．Come and see me again，on your birthday．Ah！'she cried suddenly，‘you're looking for Estella，aren't you？Answer！’ ‘Ye-yes，’I admitted．‘I hope Miss Estella is well？’ ‘ She's abroad, receiving a lady's education．She's more beautiful than ever，and admired by all who see her .Do you feel you've lost her？' She gave such an unpleasant laugh with these last words that I didn't know what to say，and as I left the house I felt even more miserable．
　　On my way through town I met Mr Wopsle，and together we started the long walk home to the village． It was a dark，wet，misty night，and we could only just see someone ahead of us．
　　‘Hello！’we called.‘Is that Orlick？’
　　‘Yes！’he answered．‘I'll walk home with you．Been in town all afternoon，I have．Did you hear the big gun firing，from the prison-ships？Must be some prisoners who' ve escaped．'That made me think of my convict．We didn't talk any more，but walked along in silence．We heard the gun firing several times.
　　It was late by the time we got to the village，and we were surprised to see lights on at the pub，and people running in and out . Mr Wopsle went in to discover what was happening，and after a few minutes rushed out，calling，‘Something wrong up at the forge，Pip！Run！They say perhaps it was an escaped convict who got into the house while Joe was out．Someone's been attacked！’
　　We didn't stop running until we reached the forge．In Mrs Joe's kitchen there was a doctor，and Joe，and a group of Women . And on the floor in the middle of them all was my sister，lying unconscious．She would never scold us again．
　　Joe had been at the pub that evening，and when he arrived home just before ten，he found her on the floor．Nothing had been stolen .She had been hit violently on the back of the head with a heavy weapon．On the floor beside her was a convict's iron chain．It did not belong to the prisoners who had escaped that day．
　　The police spent the next week investigating the attack，but did not arrest anybody. I felt sure the iron chain belonged to my convict，but I did not think he had attacked my sister. The attacker could have been either Orlick，or the stranger who had shown me the file . But several witnesses had seen Or－lick in town all evening．My only reason for suspecting him was his quarrel with my sister，but she had quarrelled with everyone in the village ten thousand times．And if the stranger had come to ask for his two pounds back，my sister would gladly have given it to him．So I could not imagine who her attacker was．
　　She lay ill in bed for a long time．She could not speak or understand much，and her character was greatly changed．She had become quiet，patient，and grateful for all our care．She used to write a word or draw a picture when she wanted some－thing，and we tried to discover what she meant．She needed someone to take care of her all the time，and luckily old Mrs Wopsle had just died，so Biddy came to live with us. She understood my sister perfectly and looked after us all very well.
　　One day my sister drew a T，and seemed to want it very much．I brought her toast，and tea，but Biddy knew immediately.
　　‘It's not a T，it's Orlick's hammer！'she cried．‘She's forgotten his name but she wants to see Orlick！’
　　I must say l expected to see my sister accuse Orlick of at－tacking her，but instead she seemed very pleased to see him. She often used to ask for him after that，and nobody knew why.
　　One Sunday I asked Biddy to come for a walk on the marshes．
　　‘Biddy，’I said seriously，‘promise to keep this a secret．I'm going to tell you something．I want to be a gentleman.'
　　‘Don't you think you're happier as you are？'she replied．
　　I had often wondered this myself，but I didn't want to hear it from her. ‘It's a pity，I know，’I said．‘It would have been much better if I could have been happy working at the forge．Perhaps you and I would have spent more time together．I would have been good enough for you，wouldn't I，Biddy？’
　　‘Oh yes，'she said sadly．‘But I don't ask for very much．'
　　‘The point is，'I continued crossly，‘if nobody had told me I was coarse and common，I wouldn't have thought abut it！’
　　Biddy looked at me，interested．‘That wasn't a true or polite thing to say. Who said it？’
　　‘It was the beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham's，and I admire her greatly，and I want to be a gentleman for her！'The words rushed out before I could stop them．
　　Biddy said gently，‘She may not be worth the trouble，Pip.’
　　‘That may be true，but I can't stop myself admiring her.'
　　Biddy was the most sensible of girls，and did not try to persuade me any more．As we walked home，I felt rested and comforted．
　　‘Pip，what a fool you are！'I said to myself．I realized how much happier I would always be with Biddy than with Estella．
　　‘Biddy，I wish I could make myself fall in love with you！’I said suddenly．‘You don't mind my speaking so openly，as you're such an old friend？’
　　‘No，of course not．But you never will fall in love with me，you see，'she answered，a little sadly .
　　I wondered if I should continue working with Joe in a plain，honest way of life，and perhaps marry Biddy. Or dare I hope that Miss Havisham would make my fortune and marry me to Estella？






■ 6 Great expectations
　　One Saturday evening，when I had been apprenticed to Joe for four years，he and I were sitting in the pub，with some of the villagers, listening to Mr Wopsle．He was giving a dramatic reading of a newspaper report of a murder trial, and we all enjoyed watching him act the main characters. His witnesses were old and feeble，his lawyers were clever and sharp-eyed，and his accused was a violent，wicked murderer.
　　Suddenly we became aware of a strange gentleman who had also been listening，and was now looking coldly at us.
　　‘Well！’he said to us，biting the side of his finger.‘So you've decided the accused was the murderer，have you？'
　　‘Sir，'answered Mr Wopsle firmly，‘yes，I do think he is guilty.’We all nodded our heads in agreement.
　　‘But，'said the stranger，‘do you or do you not know that the law of England supposes every man to be innocent until he is proved-proved-to be guilty？’
　　‘Sir，’began Mr Wopsle，‘as an Englishman myself，I-’
　　‘Come！'said the stranger，‘don't avoid the question．Either you know it，or you don't know it．Which is it？’
　　‘Of course I know it，’answered poor Mr Wopsle.
　　‘Then why didn't you say so at first？Another question. Do you know that this trial isn't finished yet？’
　　Mr Wopsle hesitated，and we all began to have a rather bad opinion of him .
　　‘And you were going to say that the accused was guilty，before the end of the trial，before he has been proved guilty！’We realized that the unfortunate Wopsle had no understanding of the law，or indeed anything at all.
　　Now the stranger stood in front of our little group.
　　‘I'm looking for the blacksmith，Joe Gargery，’he said，‘and his apprentice，Pip．’He did not recognize me but I knew he was the gentleman I had met on the stairs when visiting Miss Havisham. There was even the same smell of per－fumed soap on his large hands.‘I want to speak to you two in private，’he said，and so Joe and I left the pub and walked home with him．
　　‘My name is Jaggers，and I'm a lawyer，’he said，when he reached the forge．‘Joe Gargery，I am sent by someone who suggests cancelling this boy's apprenticeship to you．Would you want any money，if you lost your apprentice？'
　　‘I'd never stand in Pip's way，never，'said Joe，staring.‘The answer is no.’
　　‘Don't try to change that answer later，'said Mr Jaggers .‘Now，what I have to say，and remember，I'm only an agent，I don't speak for myself，is that this young man has great expectations.’
　　Joe and I gasped，and looked at each other.
　　‘I have been told to say that he will be very rich when he is older.In addition，the person who sent me wants the young man to be removed from his home and educated as a gentleman who expects to inherit a fortune.'
　　My dream had come true. Miss Havisham was making me rich！
　　‘Now，Mr Pip，’continued the lawyer，‘there are two conditions．The first is that you always use the name of Pip．The second is that the name of the person who has heen so generous to you must remain a secret，until that person chooses to tell you．You are forbidden to ask any questions or try to discover who the person is．Do you accept these conditions？
　　My heart was beating fast as I whispered，‘Yes '.
　　‘Now，to details．I have been given enough money for you to live the life of a gentleman in London while you are studying .You will come to me to ask for whatever you need .I suggest Mr Matthew Pocket as a teacher．’I remembered that was the name of one of Miss Havisham 's relations，the one who did not visit her often．‘ You must buy some new clothes．Shall I leave you twenty pounds？’He counted twenty coins out of his large purse onto the table．‘And when can you come to London？Next Saturday？’
　　I agreed，feeling very confused．He looked at Joe，who seemed even more confused.
　　‘Well，Joe Gargery？Perhaps，I only say perhaps，I promise nothing，’he said，throwing his purse carelessly from one hand to another，‘perhaps I have been told to give you a present when you lose your apprentice．'
　　Joe put his great strong hand on my shoulder in the gentlest possible way . ‘Pip can go freely to fortune and happiness，he knows that．But if you think that money can ever pay me back for losing the little child－who came to the forge－and always the best of friends！’He could not continue.
　　Dear good Joe！I was so ready to leave you，and so ungrateful to you！I can see you now，with your strong blacksmith's arm in front of your eyes，and your shoulders shaking，and tears on your cheeks. But at the time I was so excited by my good luck that I forgot what I owed to Joe. Mr Jaggers clearly thought Joe was a fool for refusing money，and left the house，reminding me to go straight to his office in London in a week's time.
　　Joe told Biddy what had happened，and both congratulated me. They were very quiet and sad at first，because I would be leaving them，but I promised I would never forget them and would often return to visit them. Biddy tried to explain the good news to my sister，but the poor woman could not under-stand．
　　As Joe and Biddy became a little more cheerful，discussing my possible plans for the future，I became more miserable. Now that I could be a gentleman，as I had always wished，I was not sure if I wanted to leave my home，which was full of happy memories.
　　That week passed slowly. I took a last walk through the churchyard to the marshes．At least I need never think about my convict again. No doubt he was dead by now.
　　I had something special to ask Biddy.‘Biddy，’I said，when we were alone，‘don't you think you could teach Joe a bit？’
　　‘What do you mean，teach him？’asked Biddy.
　　‘Well，I love dear old Joe more than anyone else，but his education and manners could be improved.’
　　Biddy opened her eyes very wide．‘Oh？'she said.‘So his manners aren't good enough，then？’
　　‘Oh，they're all right for here，but when I receive my for－tune，I'll want him to meet important people，and behave ocrrectly.’
　　Haven't you ever thought，’asked Biddy，not looking at me，‘that he wouldn't want to meet important people，he wouldn't want to be taken away from this job that he does well，and the village where he's loved？’
　　‘Now，Biddy，’I said crossly，‘are you jealous of my good luck？I didn't expect this of you．This is a bad side of your character，Biddy.’
　　‘Whether you scold me or thank me，I'll always do my best for the family at all times．And I'll always remember you，whatever you think of me，'said poor Biddy.
　　I was not pleased with this interview，and thought it was strange that the news of my expectations had not made me happier.
　　When I went into town to order my new clothes， Mr Pumblechook was waiting for me at the door of his shop．
　　‘My dear friend， if you will allow me to call you that，’ he cried，shaking both my hands，‘let me congratulate you on your fortune！ Nobody deserves it more than you！’He seemed so much more sensible than before that I agreed to have lunch with him．
　　‘When I think，’ he said happily，‘that I，Pumblechook，was able to help in my small way， by taking you to play at Miss-’
　　‘Remember，’I stopped him， ‘we must never say anything about the person who is being so generous to me．’
　　‘Don't worry， trust me， my dear friend Have some wine，have some chicken！Oh chicken，you didn't think when you were running around on the farm that you would be lucky enough to be served to one who－May I？May I？’ and he jumped up to shake my hand again．
　　As we drank our wine， Pumblechook reminded me of the happy times he and I had spent together during my childhood．I did not remember it quite like that， but I began to feel he was a good-hearted， sincere man． He wanted to ask my advice on a business matter．He said he was hoping to find a young gentleman who would put money into his business， and seemed very interested in my opinion．‘And may I？May I？’He shook hands with me again．
　　‘You know， I always used to say，“That boy will make his fortune． He's no ordinary boy．”’He had certainly kept his opinion very secret， I thought．
　　There was one person I really wanted to visit before going to London．Dressed in my new clothes I went to Miss Havisham's house，where her cousin opened the gate to me again．
　　‘Well， Pip？'said Miss Havisham to me when she saw me．
　　‘I'm going to London tomorrow， Miss Havisham，’I said，choosing my words carefully，‘and I wanted to say goodbye．I've been so lucky since I saw you last，and I'm so grateful for it！’
　　‘Good， good！’ she replied， looking delightedly at her cousin who was staring at my new clothes．‘I know about it．I've seen Mr Jaggers．So，a rich person has adopted you？’
　　‘Yes， Miss Havisham．’
　　She smiled cruelly at her cousin， who was looking rather ill．
　　‘Remember to do what Mr Jaggers tells you．And you will always keep the name of Pip，won't you？Goodbye，Pip．'she gave me her hand and I kissed it．It seemed the natural thing to do． And so I left the old lady in her bride's dress in the candle-light， with the dusty furniture around her．
　　On Saturday morning I was in such a hurry that I only said a quick goodbye to my family， before setting out to walk the few miles into town for the London coach． As I left the peaceful sleeping village， the mist over the marshes was rising，to show me the great unknown world I was entering． Suddenly I realized what I was leaving behind－my childhood， my home，and Joe． Then I wished I had asked him to walk with me to the coach， and I could not stop crying． Whenever the horses were changed on the journey， I wondered with an aching heart whether to get down and go back to say goodbye properly．But the mist had completely risen now， and my new world lay ahead of me．






■ 7 Pip arrives in London
　　At that time everybody in England agreed that London was a wonderful city．So I was surprised to find it rather ugly， with narrow dirty streets， and people crowded into tiny houses． I was frightened by its huge size． At Smith－field， the meat market， I was shocked by the dirt and blood everywhere Then I came to Newgate Prison， where a drunk old man showed me the place where prisoners were hanged，and told me excitedly that four men would die there tomorrow． I was disgusted by this news．My first impression of London could not have been worse．
　　However I managed to find Mr Jaggers’ office， noticing that other people were waiting for the great man too． After some time he appeared， walking towards me． His clients all rushed at him together． He spoke to some， and pushed others away．One man held on to the lawyer's sleeve．
　　‘Please， Mr Jaggers，’he begged，‘my brother is accused of stealing silver． Only you can save him！ I'm ready to pay any－thing！’
　　‘Your brother？’repeated the lawyer．‘And the trial is to－morrow？ Well，I'm sorry for you， and him．I'm on the other side．’
　　‘No，Mr Jaggers！’ cried the man desperately， tears in his eyes．‘Don't say you're against him！I'll pay anything！’
　　‘Get out of my way，'said Mr Jaggers and we left the man on his knees on the pavement．
　　Now Mr Jaggers turned to me and told me that on Monday I would go to Matthew Pocket's house to start my studies， but until then I would stay with his son， Herbert， who lived near-by．
　　Wemmick， Mr Jaggers’ clerk，showed me the way to Mr Pocket's rooms．He was a short， dry man， with a square， expressionless face，between forty and fifty years old． His mouth was so wide that it looked like a post-box，and gave the impression of smiling all the time．
　　‘Is London a very wicked place？’I asked him， trying to make conversation as we walked．
　　‘You may be robbed or murdered in London． But that may happen to you anywhere， if there is any profit in it for the criminal．’
　　I was not sure whether I looked forward to living in London， where people like Wemmick accepted crime so calmly．
　　We arrived at Herbert Pocket's rented rooms． The building was the dirtiest I had ever seen， with broken windows and dusty doors．It stood in a little square with dying trees around it．I looked in horror at Mr Wemmick．
　　‘Ah！’ he said，not understanding my look．‘Its quiet position makes you think of the country．I quite agree．Goodbye，Mr Pip．’
　　I went up the stairs， where there was a note on Mr Pocket's door， saying ‘Returning soon．’His idea of ‘soon’was not the same as mine． About half an hour later I heard footsteps rushing upstairs， and a young man of my age appeared breath-less at the door．‘Mr Pip？’he said．‘I'm so sorry I'm late！’
　　I greeted him in a confused manner， unable to believe my eyes Suddenly he looked closely at me and gasped．
　　‘But you're the boy at Miss Havisham's！’
　　‘And you，’ I said，‘are the pale young gentleman！’
　　We both started laughing， and shook hands．
　　‘Well！’ he said，‘I hope you'll forgive me for having knocked you down that day．’In fact I had knocked him down． But I did not contradict him．
　　‘Do you know why I was there？’ he asked．‘I had been invited to Miss Havisham's to see if she liked me．I suppose I didn't make a good impression on her．If she had liked me，I could be a rich man and engaged to Estella by now．’
　　‘Were you disappointed？’I asked．
　　‘Oh！I wouldn't want to marry Estella！She's a hard，proud girl， and Miss Havisham has brought her up to break men's hearts， as a revenge on all men．’
　　‘Is she a relation of Miss Havisham's？’I asked．
　　‘No，only adopted． Why were you at Miss Havisham's then？’
　　‘To make my fortune， the same as you！ But I was lucky．’
　　‘You know Mr Jaggers is Miss Havisham's lawyer？It was kind of him to suggest that my father should teach you． My father is Miss Havisham's cousin， you know．’
　　Herbert Pocket made an excellent impression on me． He always spoke openly and honestly．There was nothing secret or mean in his character， and we soon became good friends． I told him of my past life in the village， and my expectations．
　　‘Call me Herbert，’ he said．‘Would you mind my calling you Handel？ There's a wonderful piece of music by Handel，called The Blacksmith， which reminds me of you．’ Of course I agreed， and as we sat down to dinner， Herbert told me Miss Havisham's sad story．
　　‘Her mother died young． Her father was very rich and very proud， with only one child， Miss Havisham， by his first wife．Then he married his cook， and had a son by her．This son， a half-brother to Miss Havisham， was a bad character， and didn't inherit as much from his father as Miss Havisham did．And so perhaps he was angry with her for influencing her father against him．
　　‘Anyway，a certain man appeared， and pretended he was in love with Miss Havisham． She was certainly in love with him，and gave him whatever money he asked for． My father was the only one of her relations who dared to tell her that this man should not be trusted． She was so angry that she ordered my father straight out of the house， and he has never seen her since． Her other relations were not interested in her happiness but only in inheriting her wealth， so they said nothing． The couple fixed the wedding day， the guests were invited， the dress and the cake were brought to the house． The day came，but the man did not． He wrote a letter—’
　　‘Which she received at twenty to nine， when she was dressing for her wedding？’ I said．
　　‘Yes，so she stopped the clocks at that moment．She was very ill for a while， and since then has not seen daylight． People think that her half－brother sent the man to get money from her， and that he shared the profits． Perhaps he hated her for inheriting most of the Havisham fortune． Nobody knows what happened to the two men． So now you know as much as I do！’
　　We talked of other things．I asked Herbert what his profession was．
　　‘Oh，working in the City，’ he said happily．‘Insuring ships．There's a lot of money in that， you know． Huge profits！’
　　I began to think that Herbert must have greater expectations than I had．
　　‘Where are your ships at the moment？’ I asked admiringly．
　　‘Oh， I haven't started yet．I'm working in a counting-house just now． They don't pay me much， but I'm looking about me for a good opportunity． Then I'll make my fortune！’
　　Looking around the room， at the old， worn furniture，I realized that Herbert must be very poor．And although he seemed full of hope for the future， somehow I thought he would never be very rich or successful．
　　He and I spent a happy weekend visiting London together．Although it was all very exciting， I could not avoid noticing the dirt and bad smells and heat， and I compared it sadly with my village home， which now seemed so far away．






■ 8 Visiting Mr Wemmick and Mr Jaggers
　　Herbert introduced me to his father， who lived the other side of London， in Hammersmith． In the next few months I studied hard with Mr Pocket， who was always a most kind and helpful teacher．I divided my time between Herbert's and his father's home． If I needed money，I collected it from Wemmick at Mr Jaggers’ office， and there seemed to be plenty of money available．
　　There were two other gentlemen studying at Mr Pocket's．They were quite different from each other． Bentley Drummle came from a rich family living in the country． He was lazy，proud， mean and stupid．I much preferred Startop， who was a pleasant， sensitive young man．He and I used to row our boats up and down the river together． But Herbert was my greatest friend， and we used to spend most of our time with each other．
　　One day when I was collecting my money from Wemmick，he invited me to his house at Walworth， a village outside Lon－don．
　　‘You don't mind walking there， Mr Pip？’he asked．‘I like to get some exercise if I can．For dinner we're having a roast chicken． I think it'll be a good one because I got it from one of our clients． I always accept any little presents from clients， especially if it's cash， or anything that can easily be changed into cash． You see these rings I'm wearing？ Given by clients， just before they died．All hanged， they were．By the way，I hope you won't mind meeting my aged parent？’
　　‘No，of course not，’I said quickly．
　　‘You haven't had dinner with Mr Jaggers yet？’ Wemmick continued．‘He's inviting you， and the other three young gentlemen， tomorrow． There'll be good food and drink at his house． But I'll tell you something， Mr Pip．When you're there， look at his housekeeper．’
　　‘Why？’ I asked．‘Is there something strange about her？’
　　‘She's like a wild animal．But Mr Jaggers has trained her！Oh yes！He's stronger，and cleverer， and more complicated than anyone else in London．And you know，another strange thing about him， he never locks his doors or windows at night．’
　　‘Isn't he ever robbed？’I asked in surprise．
　　‘All the thieves in London know where he lives，but none of them would dare to rob him． They are all afraid of him， you see．They know he wouldn't rest until he had seen them hanged． He's a great man， Mr Pip．’
　　Wemmick's house at Walworth was a tiny wooden house in the middle of a garden． On top of the roof was a small gun．
　　‘We fire the gun at nine o’clock every evening，'said Wemmick proudly．‘And behind the house－I call it the Castle－I keep animals， and grow my own vegetables．So，in case of enemy attack， we can always eat our own food．What do you think of it？’
　　I congratulated him on his home． He was clearly delighted to show a visitor all his ideas and improvements．
　　‘I do everything myself，you know，’ he said．‘It helps me forget the office for a while． Would you mind being introduced to the Aged now？ He would like it very much．’
　　So we entered the Castle， where we found a cheerful old man sitting by the fire．
　　‘well，aged parent，’ said Wemmick，‘how are you？’
　　‘Very well， John，’ replied the old man，nodding happily．
　　‘Here's Mr Pip，aged parent． Nod your head at him， Mr Pip，he's completely deaf，but he likes to see people nod at him．’
　　‘This is a fine house of my son's， sir，’ cried the old man，nodding back at me．‘It should be kept by the nation for the public to visit after my son's death．’
　　‘You're proud of it，aren't you，Aged？'said Wemmick，his face losing all its usual hardness as he looked at the old man．
　　‘I hope Mr Jaggers admires your home， Mr Wemmick？’ I asked．
　　‘He's never been here． Never met the Aged．Never been invited． No， the office is one thing， and private life is another． At the office I never speak of the Castle， and at the Castle I don't think about the office．’
　　The Aged was obviously looking forward to the evening ceremony of firing the gun． At nine o’clock exactly Wemmick fired it．As the tiny house shook， the Aged jumped up and down in his armchair， crying excitedly，‘I heard it！That's the gun！’
　　Supper was excellent， and I spent the night in the smallest bedroom I had ever seen． Next morning， as Wemmick and I walked back to London， I noticed his face becoming dryer and harder， and his mouth becoming more like a post-box again．When we arrived at the office，nobody could have guessed that he had a home， or an aged parent， or any interests at all out－side his work．
　　Wemmick was right in saying that Mr Jaggers would invite me to dinner． Startop， Drummle， Herbert and I were asked to go to the office at six o’clock the next evening．There we found Jaggers washing his hands and face carefully with per－fumed soap． He did this every evening before going home． He seemed to be washing away his clients and his work， like dirt．We all walked to his house together．
　　The housekeeper brought in the first dish． She was about forty，with a strange wild expression on her pale face． She seemed almost afraid of her master， and looked anxiously at him whenever she entered the room．
　　The food was indeed very good， and the conversation was cheerful． But somehow Mr Jaggers made us all show the worst side of our characters， and encouraged Drummle， who we all disliked，to annoy us． When Drummle stupidly said that he was stronger than any of us， we all protested， foolishly showing each other our muscles to prove how strong we were．Suddenly Mr Jaggers clapped his large hand on the housekeeper's，as she was removing a dish． We stopped talking immediately．
　　‘Gentlemen，’ he said，‘look at my housekeeper here．She is stronger than any of you．Molly， show them your wrists．’
　　‘No， please， master，’ she begged， trying to pull away， but he held her hand firmly．
　　‘Show them，Molly，’ he said，and she held her wrists out to us．‘I've never seen stronger hands than these，’he said．There was silence for a few minutes．‘All right， Molly， you can go，’he said， and she hurried out．
　　During the rest of the dinner， Mr Jaggers continued to enjoy watching us quarrelling with Drummle．He gave the impression，surprisingly， of liking Drummle very much．But I was glad when the dinner was over， and Herbert and I could walk quietly back to our rooms together．






■ 9 A visit from Joe
　　‘My dear Pip，Mr Gargery asks me to tell you he will be in Lon－don soon，and could visit you at 9 o’clock on Tuesday morning，at Mr Herbert Pocket's rooms， if that is all right with you．He and I talk about you every night， and wonder what you are saying and doing．
　　Best wishes，
　　Biddy．
　　P．S．I hope you will not refuse to see him， even though you are a gentleman now． He is such a good man．’
　　I received this letter on Monday， and realized that Joe would arrive the next day． I am sorry to confess that I did not look forward to seeing him at all．If I could have kept him away by paying money， I certainly would have paid money．I knew that his clothes， his manners and uneducated way of speaking would make me ashamed of him． Luckily Herbert would not laugh at him．
　　At nine o’clock the next morning I heard Joe's clumsy boots on the stairs， and at last he entered Herbert's rooms．
　　‘Pip， how are you， Pip？’ He shook both my hands together， his good honest face shining with happiness．
　　‘I'm glad to see you， Joe．Give me your hat．’
　　But Joe insisted on holding it carefully in front of him．He was wearing his best suit， which did not fit him at all．
　　‘Well！What a gentleman you are now， Pip！’
　　‘And you look wonderfully well， Joe．’
　　‘Yes， thank God．And your poor sister is no worse． And Biddy is as hard－working as ever． But Wopsle isn't our church clerk any longer！ He's become an actor！Acting in one of your London theatres， he is！’Joe's eyes rolled around the room，noticing the expensive furniture I had bught recently．
　　‘Do sit down to breakfast， Mr Gargery，'said Herbert politely．Joe looked round desperately for a place to put his hat，and finally laid it lovingly on a shelf． Breakfast was a painful experience for me．Joe waved his fork in the air so much， and dropped so much more than he ate， that I was glad when Her－bert left to go to work．I was not sensitive enough to realize that it was all my fault， and that if I hadn't considered him common， he wouldn't have been so clumsy．
　　‘As we are now alone， sir——’began Joe．
　　‘Joe，’ I said crossly，‘how can you call me sir？’
　　He looked at me quietly for a moment．‘Wouldn't have come， you see，’he said slowly and carefully．‘wouldn't have had the pleasure of breakfast with you gentlemen． But I had to come．Got a message for you， Pip．Miss Havisham says Es-tella's come home and would be glad to see you．’
　　I felt the blood rush to my face as I heard her name．
　　‘And now I've given my message，'said Joe，standing up and picking up his hat．‘Pip，I wish you even more success．’
　　‘But you aren't leaving already， Joe？’I protested．
　　‘Yes， I am，’he said firmly． Our eyes met， and all the ‘sir’ melted out of his honest heart as he gave me his hand．‘Pip，dear old boy，life is full of so many goodbyes．I'm a blacksmith， and you're a gentleman． We must live apart．I'm not proud，it's just that I want to be in the right place．I'm wrong in these clothes， and I'm wrong in London，but I'm fine at the forge， or in the kitchen， or on the marshes． You won't find so much wrong with me if you come to see Joe，the blacksmith， at the old forge，doing the old work．I know I'm stupid， but I think I've understood this at last． And so God bless you， Pip， dear old boy， God bless you！’
　　His words， spoken simply and from the heart，touched me deeply． By the time I had managed to control my tears， and looked round for him， he had gone．
　　I decided to visit Miss Havisham as soon as possible． Next day， when I arrived to take my seat on the coach to our town，I discovered I was sitting in front of two convicts， who were being taken to the prison-ships by their guard．The prisoners wore handcuffs， and iron chains on their legs． With horror I suddenly recognized one of them－it was the man in our village pub who had given me the two pound notes！ and strangely enough， during the journey I heard the prisoners talking about it．
　　‘So Magwitch asked you to give the boy two pounds？Trusted you to do it？’
　　‘That's right．And I did what he asked．The boy had helped him， you see． Fed him， and kept his secret．’
　　‘What happened to Magwitch in the end？’
　　‘They sent him to Australia for life， because he tried to es-cape from the prison－ship．’
　　I knew I looked so different that he would not recognize me， but I was afraid all the same． All the horror of my child－hood experience with the escaped convict had come back to me， just when I thought it was safe to forget it．
　　But once we had arrived，and I was on my way to Miss Havisham's house，I thought only of my bright future．She had adopted Estella，she had more or less adopted me． She perhaps wanted me to inherit the dark old house and to marry Estella． But even though I was in love， I didn't hide from myself the fact that I would be unhappy with Estella． I loved her because I couldn't stop myself loving her．
　　I was surprised to see Orlick opening the gate to me．
　　‘So you aren't working for Joe any longer？’I asked．
　　‘As you see， young master，’he said rudely．
　　I knew he could not be trusted， and I decided to tell Mr Jaggers that Orlick was not responsible enough to work for Miss Havisham． Mr Jaggers would probably send him away．
　　When I entered Miss Havisham's room， there was a well－dressed lady sitting with her． When she lifted her head and looked at me， I realized it was Estella． She had become so beautiful that I felt very distant from her． In spite of all my education， I still seemed to be the coarse， common boy she used to laugh at．
　　‘She's changed very much，hasn't she， Pip？’ asked Miss Havisham， laughing wickedly．I replied confusedly． I could see that Estella was still proud， and I knew that it was she who made me feel ashamed of home， and Joe，but I also knew that I could never stop loving her．
　　She and I walked in the ancient garden， talking quietly about our childhood meetings．Now that we were adults， she seemed to accept me as a friend．I could not have been happier． I felt sure Miss Havisham had chosen us for each other． What a fool I was！
　　Suddenly she stopped and turned to me．‘Miss Havisham may want us to spend more time together in future． But in that case I must warn you that I have no heart．I can never fall in love．’
　　‘I can't believe that，’ I replied． As she looked straight at me， I recognized something in her face． Had I seen that ex－pression recently，on another woman？
　　When we went back to the house，Miss Havisham spoke to me alone．‘Do you admire her， Pip？’ she asked eagerly．
　　‘Everbody who sees her must admire her．’
　　She pulled my head down to hers with her bony arm and whispered，‘Love her，love her，love her！If she likes you，love her！ If she hurts you， love her！ If she tears your heart to pieces，love her！’I could feel the muscles on her thin arm round my neck． She seemed so angry that she could have been talking about hate， or revenge， or death， rather than love．






■ 10 Pip and Herbert talk about love
　　I returned to London， dreaming of the beautiful girl， now a woman， who had so influenced my childhood，and who， I hoped， would share my future life． I am sorry to say I did not think about dear， good Joe at all． I felt I had to ex－press my feelings to someone， and so that evening I told Herbert my secret．
　　Instead of being surprised， as I expected， my friend replied，
　　‘I know that already， Handel．You never told me， but it was obvious．You've always loved Estella．It's very lucky that you seem to have been chosen to marry her．Does she， er，admire you？’
　　I shook my head sadly．‘Not at all． And Herbert， you may think me lucky．I have great expectations，I know．But all that depends on one person！ And I still don't really know how much I'll receive， or when！ Nothing is certain！’
　　‘Now， Handel，'said Herbert cheerfully，‘don't lose hope．Mr Jaggers himself told you you would have a large fortune，didn't he？ He would never make a mistake about something like that．Anyway， you'll be twenty－one soon．Perhaps you'll discover more then．’
　　‘Thank you，Herbert！’ I said， feeling much better．
　　‘But I want to ask you something， my dear Handel，'said Herbert，looking serious for once．‘Think of Estella， and her education， and how unhappy you may be with her．Couldn't you possibly-and I'm saying this as a friend， remember-couldn't you forget about her？’
　　‘I know you're right， Herbert，’I said miserably，‘but I can never stop loving her．’
　　‘Well， never mind！'said Herbert．‘Now I have something to tell you myself． I am engaged．’
　　‘May I ask the young lady's name？’
　　‘Clara．Her mother's dead， and she lives with her father．We must keep our feelings for each other secret， because I haven't enough money to marry her yet． As soon as I start in－suring ships we can marry．’Herbert tried to look hopeful about his future， but this time he couldn't even manage his usual cheerful smile．
　　One day I received a letter which made my heart beat fast．
　　‘I am coming to London the day after tomorrow by the mid-day coach．Miss Havisham wants you to meet me．
　　Estella．’
　　If there had been time，I would have ordered several new suits．I ate nothing until the day arrived， and all morning I waited impatiently for the coach．She seemed more beautiful than ever， and her manner to me was very pleasant， as I took her to the house in London where Miss Havisham had arranged for her to stay． Her life seemed to be planned by Miss Havisham right down to the smallest detail．I only hoped I was part of that plan．






■ 11 Pip attends a burial
　　One evening a black－edged envelope was delivered to me at Herbert's rooms． The letter inside informed me that Mrs J．Gargery had died the previous Monday，and that the burial would be next Monday， at 3 p．m．This news came as a shock to me．It was the first time that someone close to me had died， and I could not imagine life without my sister，even if I had never loved her， or even thought about her recently．
　　I arrived at the forge early on Monday afternoon． Joe was sitting in the front room， wrapped in a black cloak．
　　‘Dear Joe，how are you？’I asked．
　　‘Pip，dear old boy， you knew her when she was a fine woman…’and he could say no more．
　　Biddy， in her neat little black dress， was busy serving food．Old friends from the village were talking quietly among them-selves， and I noticed the awful Pumblechook trying to catch my eye， as he drank brandy and swallowed large pieces of cake．
　　‘May I，my dear sir？ May I？’he asked， his mouth full，and shook my hand enthusiastically．
　　My sister's dead body was carried slowly out of the house and through the village， followed by all of us．We could see the marshes， and the sails of ships on the river．And there，in the churchyard，next to my unknown parents，my poor sister was laid quietly in the earth，while the birds sang and the clouds danced in the sky．
　　Biddy，Joe and I felt better when all the guests had gone，and we had a quiet supper together．I decided to spend the night at the forge，which pleased Joe very much．I was pleased with myself for offering to do so．
　　I waited until I found Biddy alone．Then I said，‘I suppose you won't be able to stay here now，will you，Biddy？’
　　‘No，Mr Pip．I'll stay in the village，but I'll still look after Mr Gargery as much as I can．’
　　‘How are you going to live，Biddy？If you want any money— ’
　　‘I'm going to be the village schoolteacher，'she said quickly，her cheeks pink．‘I can earn my own money．’
　　‘Tell me，Biddy，how did my sister die？’ ‘She had been worse than usual，when one evening she said，very clearly，“Joe．” And so I ran to the forge to fetch him．And she put her arms round his neck and laid her head on his shoulder，quite happy．Once she said“sorry”，and once “Pip”．She never lifted her head up again，and an hour later she died．’
　　Biddy cried，and I cried too． ‘What happened to Orlick，Biddy？’ ‘He's still in the village．He doesn't work for Miss Havisham any more．You know，he－he follows me sometimes．’
　　‘You must tell me if he bothers you，Biddy．I'll be here more often now．I'm not going to leave poor Joe alone．’
　　Biddy said nothing． ‘Come，Biddy，what do you mean by this silence？’
　　‘Are you quite sure，then，that you will come to see him？’ ‘Oh Biddy！’I said sadly．‘This really is a bad side to your character！ Don't say any more！’And that evening I thought how unkind，how unjust，Biddy was to me．
　　Next morning I looked in at the forge before leaving，and said goodbye to Joe，who was already hard at work． ‘I shall be back to see you soon，Joe！’
　　‘Never too soon，sir，'said Joe，‘and never too often，Pip！’
　　As I walked away，I think I knew that I would not go back．Biddy was right．
　　In London，I did some serious thinking．I could see that my character had not improved since I had heard about my expectations．I was spending far too much money．What was worse，I was a bad influence on Herbert，who was also spend－ing too much．I would have offered to pay his bills，but he was too proud to listen to such a suggestion．I had hoped that on my twenty－first birthday I would discover more about my future，but Mr Jaggers explained that he could not give me any more information，except that from now on I would have five hundred pounds a year to spend as I liked．I suddenly thought of a way I could help Herbert．
　　When l asked Wemmick if he could advise me on how to help a friend start up in business，his post-box mouth opened wide．
　　‘Choose one of the six London bridges，’he said，‘and throw your money over it．That's better than investing money for a friend．That's my official opinion，of course．’
　　‘Ah，so you would give me a different opinion at Walworth？’
　　‘You'll be welcome there，Mr Pip，on private business．’
　　Next Sunday I visited Wemmick and his aged parent at the Castle．This time there was a lady called Miss Skiffins，clearly a regular visitor，who made the tea，and sat next to Wemmick on the sofa．When he and I were alone，Wemmick listened carefully to my request，and after thinking hard，found an answer．
　　With his help I arranged to invest some money in a shipping company called Clarrikers．Finally I signed an agreement with them，in which they promised to offer Herbert a job，and later to make him a partner．At last I felt that my expectations had done some good to someone．






■ 12 Pip discovers the truth
　　While Estella lived in London，staying with friends of Miss Havisham's，I often visited her．She had an endless stream of admirers，and I was jealous of all of them．I never had an hour's happiness with her，but I still thought about her，day and night，and my dearest wish was to marry her．Several times Miss Havisham ordered me to bring Estella to visit her，and of course I always obeyed．Estella was as proud and cold as ever，with her admirers，with Miss Havisham and with me．
　　One man who admired her and followed her everywhere was the unpleasant Bentley Drummle．One day I asked her about him．
　　‘Estella，why do you encourage someone like Drummle？You know very well he's stupid，and nobody likes him．’
　　‘Don't be foolish，Pip，'she answered．‘Perhaps I encourage him because that has a certain effect on the others．’
　　‘But he isn't worth it！’I cried angrily．
　　‘What difference does it make？'she answered tiredly．‘If I smile at him，it's because it means nothing to me．You should be glad that I don't give you false looks or smiles．At least I am always honest with you．’
　　But while my heart was aching for Estella，I had no idea that I would soon be hit by a disaster which would completely destroy my hopos and dreams．The chain of events which had begun before I ever met her was slowly reaching its end．
　　Herbert and I had moved to rooms in a house by the river，in the Temple area．One evening he was abroad on business and I was alone at home，reading．It was terrible weather，stormy and wet，with deep mud in the streets．The wind rushing up the river shook the whole building，and the rain beat violently against the windows．As I closed my book at eleven o’clock，I heard a heavy footstep on the stairs．When I went to the door with my lamp，I saw a man coming slowly upstairs．He was wearing rough clothes，and he was about six－ty，with a brown face and long grey hair．But what really surprized me was that he was holding out both hands to me．
　　‘Can I help you？’I asked politely but coldly．
　　‘Ah！Yes，’he said，dropping his hands，‘yes，I'll explain．’He came into the sitting－room，where he looked round admiringly at my furniture and books．He held out his hands to me again，but I refused to take them．Then he sat down heavily in a chair，and rubbed his eyes with one rather dirty hand．
　　‘You see，’he said，‘it's disappointing．Looked forward to this day for so long，I have．But it's not your fault．I'll explain．Is there anybody near who can hear us？’
　　‘Why do you，a stranger，visiting me late at night，ask that question？’I asked．And then suddenly I knew who he was！In spite of the years that had passed，I was sure he was my convict！ And when he held out his hands again，this time I took them．He raised my hands to his lips and kissed them．
　　‘You helped me all those years ago，Pip！Never forgotten it！’He seemed to want to put his arms around me，but I stopped him．
　　‘If you are grateful to me for what I did in my childhood，I hope you have improved your way of life now．It wasn't necessary to come here to thank me．But you must understand that．…’I stopped speaking as I noticed how strangely he was staring at me．
　　‘What must I understand？’he asked，his eyes fixed on me．
　　‘That I don't wish to be your friend．You and I met once in the past，but now our lives are separate．Will you have a drink before you leave？’As I handed him a glass of rum，I noticed that his eyes were full of tears．‘I'm sorry if that sounds hard，’l added．‘I didn't mean it to be．Good luck in the future！’We drank together．‘How have you been living recently？’
　　‘I was sent to Australia，you know，because I escaped from the prison-ship．After several years I finished my punishment， and so I was allowed to work for myself．I did every kind of job there．It was a hard life，but I made a lot of money．’
　　‘I'm glad to hear it，’I said．‘That reminds me，I must give you back the two pounds you sent me．I don't need it now．’And I handed him two new pound notes from my purse．Still watching me，he held them near the lamp until they caught fire．
　　‘May I ask，’he said，‘how you have done so well，since you and I met on those lonely marshes？’His eves were still fixed on mine，and I began to tremble．
　　‘I－I've been chosen to inherit a fortune，’I whispered．
　　‘Perhaps I can guess how much，'said the convict．‘Could it be，well，five hundred pounds a year？’I stood up，holding on to the back of my chair，my heart beating like a hammer．
　　‘The agent who arranged it all，’he continued．‘was he perhaps a lawyer，name of Jaggers？’
　　Suddenly I realized the awful truth．I could not speak nor breathe，and fell on to the sofa．He brought his fierce old face close to mine，and bent over me．
　　‘Yes，Pip，dear boy， I've made a gentleman of you！You see，I promised myself that all the money I earned out there in Australia should go to you！I'm your second father，Pip！I'm not a gentleman myself，and I didn't go to school，but I've got you，Pip！And look what a gentleman you are！And what books you've got！ You'll read them to me，Pip！And I'll be proud of you even if I can't understand them！Didn't you ever think it could be me who was sending the money？’
　　‘Oh no，no，no，’I replied．‘Never，never！Wasn't any－one else involved at all？’
　　No，just me，and Jaggers，of course．Who else could there be？Dear boy，I kept myself going，you see，through all the hard work，just by thinking of you．And I promised myself I'd come back to England one day，and see my boy．’He laid his band on my shoulder．‘Now you must find a bed for me，’he added，‘and remember，not a word to anybody．I was sent away for life，and they'll hang me if they discover I've come back．’
　　My feelings were horribly confused．The man who had paid for my education and luxuries for years was risking his life to see me．I could not like him，in fact my whole body trembled with disgust when he touched me，but I had to protect him．
　　He went to sleep in Herbert's room．After locking all the doors carefully，I sat weakly down by the fire and tried to make sense of my life．How foolish my dreams had been！ Miss Havisham had never intended to make me rich，or let me marry Estella．But there was something worse than that．It was for this convict，who could be caught and hanged at any moment，that I had deserted Joe．I could never，never，never forgive myself for that．






■ 13 Planning Magwitch's futureand hearing about his past
　　I slept a little，but woke early．I felt I needed some fresh air，and went downstairs and out of the building．On the way down I fell over a man hiding in a dark corner，who ran away immediately．This worried me．I suspected he had followed my convict to the house．Would he now inform the police？
　　My guest and I had breakfast together．He ate noisily and greedily，like an animal．I tried hard not to be disgusted by his manners．He told me his name was Abel Magwitch，and after breakfast he lit his pipe and held out his hands for mine again．
　　‘All I want is to stand and look at you，dear boy！’he said．‘A real gentleman，made by me！You're going to have every－thing a London gentleman should have，a carriage，and horses，and everything！’He threw a great thick wallet on to the table．‘All that is yours．I've come back to England to watch you spend it．’
　　‘Stop！’I cried desperately．‘We must discuss your plans．How long are you going to stay here？’
　　‘How long？’he repeated，surprised．‘I'm not going back．’
　　‘But where will yon be safe？’
　　‘Dear boy，who knows I'm here？You，Jaggers and Wemmick，that's all．Anyway，I know I can live with the fear of death．I've done that all my life．’
　　All I knew was that I must keep him out of sight until Herbert returned Then we could produce a better plan for the future．I decided to rent a room for him in a house near ours，where I thought he would be safe for the moment．I bought him different clothes，and had his hair cut，but to me he looked just the same，and I lived in constant fear that he would he recognized by someone who had known him in the past．
　　My unwanted guest and I spent five long days and evenings together，with the wind and rain beating on the windows．Those few days seemed more like a year to me．He slept，or ate，or played cards．Sometimes he listened to me reading，with a proud smile on his face．I could not sleep or eat． I used to watch him sleep，wondering what bloody crimes lay in his past，and knowing that I alone protected him from a horrible death．
　　I cannot describe my joy when Herbert finally returned． At last I could share my terrible news with my friend．He，too，was shocked to hear that my great expectations came from the prisoner I had helped so long ago，and when I introduced him to our guest，Herbert could hardly hide his dislike．
　　When we were alone，he said to me，‘You look so pale，Handel．This has been a painful time for you．’
　　‘Herbert，something must be done．He wants to spend even more on me！He must be stopped！’
　　‘You mean you can't accept any more of his money？’
　　‘How can I？ You know he's a criminal！How do I know where his money comes from？ And think what I owe him al－ready！I have no way of paying him back．Oh Herbert，if I didn't have you as a friend，I'd be desperate！’I could only just control my tears．Herbert kindly pretended not to notice．
　　‘My dear Handel，’he said，‘if you want to pay back what you owe him，you could always join my company，Clarrikers．I'm going to be a partner there soon，you know．’Poor Her-bert！He did not suspect whose money was helping him be－come a partner．
　　‘But there's another thing，’added Herbert．‘This man has a fierce and violent character．He's come here with a fixed idea，which he's been looking forward to for half his life．If you destroy his idea，his life will be worthless．’
　　‘And he will allow himself to be arrested and hanged，’I continued，nodding．‘Yes，I've thought that ever since he arrived．If that happened，I'd feel guilty for ever．’
　　‘So you cannot destroy his dream now．First we must get him out of England，where he risks death every moment．Then you will explain that you can't accept his money．I'll help you all the way，trust me．’I shook Herbert's hand gratefully．
　　Next morning after breakfast we asked Magwitch to tell us more about his past life，so that we could protect him better．
　　‘You promise to keep it a secret，Pip's friend？’he said to Herbert．‘Well I'll put it in a few words．In prison and out of prison．That's been my life，more or less．Don't remember my parents．No idea where I was born．I slept in fields，I stole food，sometimes I worked．And I grew to be a man．It was about twenty years ago I met Compeyson．I'd kill him now，at once，if I met him！He's the man I was fighting when the soldiers found me on the marshes，Pip．He was handsome and educated，so people thought he was a gentleman and trusted him．I was a partner in his business，and a dirty business it was，too．We persuaded rich people to invest their money with us，we used stolen banknotes，we wrote false cheques．Compeyson was clever，but what a wicked，cold hear the had！He always got the profits but never the blame．
　　‘His former partner，Arthur，lived in Compeyson's house and was very ill．In fact he was dying．He and Compeyson had got a lot of money out of a rich lady some years before，and Arthur kept dreaming of this lady．Late one night he appeared at the sitting－room door，pale and shaking，crying，“Compeyson，she's there！In my room！All dressed in white，ready for the wedding！She's angry，she says she wants revenge！You brobke her heart，you know you did！And now she say I'm going to die！”
　　‘Compeyson and his wife put Arthur back to bed，but at five o’clock in the morning we heard screams coming from his room，and he died soon after．
　　‘I should have realized it was a mistake getting involved with Compeyson．In the end we were both arrested for several crimes．And what happened？At the trial he lied and lied．I was the criminal，in and out of prison all my life，and I got fourteen years on the prison-ship．He was the gentleman，of good character and with important friends，and only got seven years．
　　Magwitch had become very excited，and had to breathe deeply to calm himself．‘I promised myself I'd smash his handsome face when I saw him on the prison-ship．I was just going to，when a guard caught hold of me．I managed to escape by diving into the river．That's how I reached the marshes，and the churchyard．And then Pip，my boy，you told me Compeyson was on the marshes too．He must have escaped，like me．So I hunted him and smashed his face，and I was going to take him back to the prison-ship，so that he wouldn't have the pleasure of being free，when the soldiers caught us．Again he was clever．His punishment for escaping was light．But I was brought to trial again，and sent to Australia for life．’
　　‘Is Compeyson dead？’I asked after a silence．
　　‘Heard no more of him，’he said，shaking his head．‘But if he's alive，he hopes I'm dead，that's certain！’
　　Herbert passed me a note he had been writing．It said：
　　‘The name of Miss Havisham's half－brother was Arthur．Compeyson is the man who pretended to be in love with her．’






■ 14 Pip visits Estella and Miss Havisham again
　　Before taking Magwitch abroad，I felt I must see both Estella and Miss Havisham．When I visited Estella's London home，I found she had gone to stay with Miss Hav－isham，and so，leaving Magwitch in Herbert's care，I went by coach to the town I knew so well．
　　Before walking to Miss Havisham's，I went to the hotel for breakfast．It was an unpleasant shock to discover Bentley Drummle there，but I could imagine his reason for visiting the area．When he noticed me，he immediately called to the waiter，making sure I could hear，‘Listen，you！The lady isn't going riding today．And remember，I'm not having dinner here tonight，I'll be at the lady's．’And Drummle smiled wickedly at me，knowing that what he said cut me to the heart．He went out，shouting for his horse．
　　If he had spoken Estella's name，I would have hit him．I was so angry with him，and so depressed about my future，that I could not eat the breakfast．Instead I went straight to the old house．
　　I found Miss Havisham and Estella sitting in the same room，with candles burning as usual．
　　‘Miss Havisham，’I said，‘I must tell you that I'm as unhappy as you ever wanted me to be．I've discovered who has been paying for my education．Now I know I shall never be rich，or important．I cannot tell you any more．It isn't my secret，but another person's．’I stopped，considering what to say next．
　　‘Go on，'said Miss Havisham，looking interested．
　　‘I thought it was you，Miss Havisham！And you encouraged me in my mistake！’
　　‘Why should I be kind to anybody after all I've suffered！’cried Miss Havisham angrily．
　　‘Yes，you're right，’I said quickly，to calm her．‘But you also encouraged your relations to think I would inherit some of your fortune．’
　　‘Why shouldn't I？'she cried wildly．
　　‘But Matthew Pocket and his son are different．They aren't selfish or greedy，they're generous and honest．I want you to know that．’
　　She looked carefully at me．‘What do you want for them？’
　　‘I'm asking for money，’I replied，my cheeks red．‘I would like you to help my friend Herbert become a partner in his company．I started paying for this myself two years ago-and I want to keep it a secret from him－but now I find I can't continue the payments．I can't explain why．It's part of the other person's secret．
　　Miss Havisham looked at the fire，and then at me again．
　　‘What else？'she asked．
　　Turning to Estella，I tried to control my trembling voice．‘You know I love you，Estella，’I said．‘I have loved you long and dearly．'she shook her head．
　　‘I know，I know I have no hope of ever marrying you，Estella．But I have loved you ever since I first saw you in this house．It was cruel of Miss Havisham to encourage me to hope，but I don't think she meant to be unkind．’
　　‘What you say，'said Estella very calmly，‘doesn't touch my heart．I can't feel love as you do． And I've warned you of this．Haven't I？’
　　‘Yes，’I answered miserably，‘but I couldn't believe it．’
　　‘It's the way I've been brought up．’
　　‘Estella，Bentley Drummle is in town here．You go riding with him，don't you？Is he having dinner with you tonight？’
　　‘It is all true，'she answered，a little surprised．
　　‘You cannot love him，Estella！’I cried．
　　‘Didn't you listen？I can never love anyone！’And then she added，‘But why not tell you the truth？ I'm going to marry him．’
　　I covered my face with my hands．After a moment I lifted my head and cried，‘Dont't throw yourself away on an animal like him！Even if you won't marry me，there must be others who love you．Any of them would be a thousand times better than Drummle！’
　　‘I can't marry a man who expects me to love him．So Drummle will do well enough as my husband．You will soon forget me．’
　　‘Never，Estella！You are part of myself．You are in every line I've read，in every view I've seen，in every dream I've dreamt．To the last hour of my life，you will remain part of me． God bless you and God forgive you！’I held her hand to my lips for a moment．As I left，Estella's lovely face looked at me in wonder，but Miss Havisham was staring at me with a mixture of pity and guilt．
　　It was all over．To calm my feelings I walked all the way back to London．At night the Temple gates were always closed，but the night－porter let me in when I told him my name．He gave me an envelope addressed to Mr Pip．Inside，in Wemmick's writing，it said：‘DON’T GO HOME．’






■ 15 Shelter for Magwitch
　　I spent a restless night at a hotel，worrying about the reasons for Wemmick's warning．Early in the morning I went to see him at the Castle．He told me he had heard I was being watched，and that someone was looking for Magwitch．He also knew that Compeyson was alive and in London．While I was absent，Wemmick had warned Herbert to move our guest to a safer place．Clara，the girl Herbert was in love with，lived with her old father in a house on the river，quite near the open sea，and Herbert had arranged to rent rooms for Magwitch in this house．It was further away from the centre of London and our home，and we could easily take Magwitch abroad by boat from there．
　　‘Our friend is there now，'said Wemmick，‘and you can visit him tonight，but don't go back there after that．And re－member，Mr Pip，’he added firmly，‘remember to get his cash．You don't know what may happen to him．Don't let anything happen to his cash．’
　　I could not explain to Wemmick how I felt about Magwich's money，so I said nothing．
　　That evening I visited the house，and met Clara，a lovely girl，obviously in love with Herbert．How lucky she and Herbert were！I thought of Estella，and felt very sad．
　　Magwitch seemed quieter and more likeable than the last time I had seen him．He accepted all our arrangements for him gratefully．I was almost sorry to say goodbye to him．
　　I decided to keep a rowing boat near our rooms，so that Her－bert or I could row up and down the river，as far as Clara's house．If Magwitch saw us on the river，he could draw his bedroom curtain to show everything was all right．
　　For the next few weeks，life went on as normal．Herbert went to work and visited Clara in the evenings．I rowed on the river，and waited for news from Wemmick．
　　One evening，instead of reading alone in my room，I went to the theatre where Mr Wopsle was acting．He noticed me in the audience，and kept looking at me in a very strange way．After the play we met outside the theatre，and he asked immediately，
　　‘You didn't see that man sitting right behind you，Mr Pip？’
　　I felt suddenly cold．‘Who was he？’I asked．
　　‘You remember，Mr Pip，that Christmas Day，when you were a boy？We went on to the marshes with the soldiers and found the escaped convicts fighting each other．Well，one of those two was looking over your shoulder tonight．’
　　‘Which one？’I asked，holding my breath．
　　‘The one with the bleeding face，’he answered．
　　So Compeyson was still following me！I knew Magwitch was in great danger．Later that evening Herbert and I discussed the problem，and promised each other to be more careful than ever．
　　About a week later I met Mr Jaggers by chance in the street，and he invited me to dinner that evening．Wemmick was there too．Mr Jaggers told me Miss Havisham wished to see me on business，so I said I would go the next day．
　　Then Jaggers said，‘Well，Pip！Our friend Drummle has won a great prize！He has married Estella！’
　　I had been expecting this news for some time but it still came as a terrible shock．
　　‘I wonder，’continued Jaggers，‘who will be the stronger in the end，the wife or the husband？He may beat her—’
　　‘Surely he isn't wicked enough to do that！’I cried．
　　‘He may，or he may not．But she is certainly more intelligent than him．We shall see．’
　　Just then I noticed the housekeeper putting a dish on the table．I stared at her．I had seen exactly such eyes，and such hands，very recently！And suddenly I was absolutely certain that this woman was Estella's mother．
　　Later，as Wemmick and I left Jaggers’house together，I asked him about his employer's housekeeper．He told me that，many years before，she had been jealous of her husband and another woman，and had been accused of murdering this woman．Jaggers was her lawyer，and at her trial he managed to show that she was not strong enough to kill anyone．She was also suspected of killing her three－year－old daughter，who had disappeared．But because of Jaggers’clever arguing，she was judged innocent of murder．Aftef the trial she left her husband and became Jaggers’housekeeper．






■ 16 Miss Havisham realizes how Pip has suffered
　　When I went to see Miss Havisham the next day，as she had requested，her house looked darker than ever，and I realized how lonely she was without Estella．She looked sadly at me．
　　‘Tell me，Pip，'she said，stretching out her hand to me，‘how can I help your friend？You said something about it last time．
　　I explained my agreement with Clarrikers to make Herbert a partner．Nine hundred pounds still had to be paid．
　　‘And you will be happier if I pay this？’
　　‘Much happier．’
　　‘can't I help you yourself，Pip？’
　　‘There is nothing you can do，’I answered．
　　She wrote a cheque which she handed to me．‘Mr Jaggers will give you the money．And-here，Pip，’handing me another piece of paper，‘here is a note with my name on．If，one day，you can write under my name“I forgive her”，please do it．’
　　‘Oh Miss Havisham，’I said，‘I can do it now．We have all made mistakes．I can't be bitter with anyone．’
　　‘What have I done，Pip！'she cried，dropping to her knees in front of me．‘I should never have brought up Estella like that，or allowed you to be hurt！’
　　‘Could I ask you something about Estella？How and why did you adopt her？’
　　‘I never knew her parents，'she said quietly．‘I asked Jaggers to find a little girl for me to adopt，and he brought Estella here，when she was about three．’
　　We had no more to say to each other，and so I left．But on my way through the old garden I had a strange feeling that something was wrong，and I ran back upstairs to check that Miss Havisham was all right．As I opened the door of her room，I saw her sitting close to the fire．Suddenly a great flame lit the room．She turned and rushed towards me，screaming，her hair and clothes on fire．Somehow I managed to cover her with my coat and put out the flames with my hands．
　　I sent for a doctor，who cleaned her wounds．Her bed was placed on the great dining table，where her wedding cake had been，and she lay there，covered with a white sheet，half con-scions．I could not stay，but left her in the care of the doctor and several nurses，and returned to London．
　　My hands and right arm had been badly burnt．But al－though I was in great pain，I was desperate to know if Mag－witch was safe．
　　‘Everything's fine，’Handel，’Herbert told me calmly，as he gently put bandages on my hands．‘He seems much pleasanter than before．I actually like him now．Do you know，yesterday he was telling me about his past．Apparently at one time he was married to a young woman who was jealous of an-other woman．There was a fight， and his wife killed the other Luckily for her，she had a clever lawyer at her trial，and was never punished for the murder．She and Magwitch had a daughter， who Magwitch dearly loved Both wife and child disappeared after the trial， and he thought his wife must have killed their daughter．’
　　‘How old was the child？’I asked，trying to control my excitement．
　　‘She would have been about your age，if she had lived．’
　　‘Herbert，’ I said，‘am I ill or mad or anything？’
　　‘No，’replied Herbert， after examining me carefully，‘al-though you do look a little excited．’
　　‘Listen， Herbert．Magwitch is Estella's father．’
　　The next day，although I felt ill and weak，because of my burns，I went straight to Jaggers’office．He admitted that Estella was his housekeeper's daughter，adopted by Miss Hav-isham to give her the chance of a better life． But even he，the great Jaggers，did not know that Magwitch was Estella's father．






■ 17 Pip is close to death
　　I paid Clarrikers Miss Havisham's nine hundred pounds，and felt glad that Herbert's future，at least， was safe．Clarrikers were going to send Herbert to India，to open a new office there．So while helping my old friend，I would be losing him at the same time．
　　Wemmick advised us to move Magwitch out of the country in the middle of the week．So we decided to row the boat down to Clara's house on Wednesday，collect Magwitch，and continue right down the river to Essex，where we could stop one of the foreign ships sailing from the port of London to Ger many or Holland．With luck，nobody would notice us or sus pect us．Our friend Startop agreed to row instead of me，as my hands were still too painful．
　　However， when I went back to our rooms on Monday， my head full of arrangements for the journey，I found a letter，ad dressed to me and delivered by hand．It said：
　　‘If you want information about your guest，you should come tonight or tomorrow night to the old house near the lime kiln on the marshes．Tell no one．You must come alone．’
　　I did not have time to consider． I rushed out again and was just in time to catch the afternoon coach．
　　I stopped in town only to ask about Miss Havisham． She was still very ill， it seemed．Then I walked fast on to the dark lonely marshes．Soon I arrived at the lime-kiln， which was still burning，although the workmen had all gone home．I pushed open the door of the old house， which I thought was uninhabited，but to my surprise there was a bed， a table and a candle inside Suddenly the candle was blown out，I was at-tacked from behind and my arms were tied close to my sides with a thick rope．The pain in my injured arm was terrible．In a moment the candle was lit again，and I recognized my at-tacker．Orlick！I saw he had been drinking，and I knew I was in a very dangerous situation．
　　‘Now，’ he said fiercely，‘I've got you！’
　　‘Why have you brought me here？’I asked．
　　‘Don't yon know？’ he replied， drinking straight from a bottle．‘Because you're my enemy． I lost that job at Miss Havisham's because of you． And what's more， Biddy would have liked me if you hadn't been there．You've been in my way ever since you were a child．And now I'm going to have your life！Tonight you're going to die！’
　　I felt I was looking down into my own grave． I could see no possible way of escape．
　　‘More than that，’he said，‘I don't want anything left of you．I'll put your body in the kiln．Even your clothes will be burnt，and in the morning there'll be nothing left．’
　　I realized I had not told anybody where I was going．No-body would know where to look for me．
　　‘Another thing，’he said，smiling cruelly，‘it was your fault your ugly sister was attacked．I did it，I hit her with the iron chain your convict left on the marshes，but I did it be cause I hated you！’ He drank again．I watched the level of the liquid go down．I knew that when he finished the bottle， my life would end．
　　‘And I know all about that convict you’ re hiding． I've waited and watched outside your rooms and on the stairs．You fell over me once．I've got a friend who's going to inform the police about him．Yes，Compeyson'll make sure he's hanged，when you're dead！’
　　The last of the rum went down his throat， and picking up his hammer he came towards me．Determined to fight，I shouted as loudly as I could． Suddenly the door was thrown open and Herbert and Startop rushed in． With a violent shout Orlick jumped over the table and escaped into the night．
　　My two friends had found Orlick's letter to me， which， in my hurry，I had dropped in my room in London． They had suspected some wicked plot， and come straight to the town，and then to the marshes， to find me． Luckily they had arrived just in time．
　　They took me back to London that night， and looked after me carefully all the next day， so that， although my arm was still aching， and I felt very weak，I was fit enough for the planned journey on Wednesday．






■ 18 The end of Magwitch's story
　　It was a cold，bright morning when we set out cheerfully down the river．I steered the boat，Herbert and Startop rowed．At Clara's house Magwitch was waiting for us，wrapped in a dark cloak．
　　‘Dear boy！’he said， putting his hand on my shoulder as he sat down heavily in the boat．‘Thank you！’
　　We rowed eastwards down the river all day， looking round all the time to check that no one was following us Magwitch seemed quite happy， smoking his pipe and watching the water．
　　You don't know what a pleasure it is to me， Pip，’he said once，‘to be with my dear boy，in the open air．’
　　‘You'll be completely safe， and free， tomorrow，’ I said．
　　‘I hope so，dear boy．But looking into the frture，well，that's like looking for the bottom of the river， isn't it？ Can't be done．’He remained silent after that．
　　We decided to spend the night at a little riverside pub．It seemed safe because there were no other guests， but the pub owner asked us a question which worried us．
　　‘Did you see that boat go past， gentlemen？ Rowed by four men， with two others on board．It's been up and down the river several times．Could be a Customs boat．’
　　When he left us alone， we discussed this information in whispers．In the end we decided to go to bed， and then set out the next morning just in time to catch the ship to Hamburg．I woke early，and when I looked out of the window，I saw two men examining our boat，but I decided not to wake Herbert or Startop，who needed their rest after rowing all the previous day．
　　Late in the morning we rowed into the centre of the river．We could see the ship to Hamburg coming closer． Magwitch and I picked up our bags，and said goodbye to Herbert and Startop，so that we would be ready to stop the ship and get on board．Suddenly a boat rowed by four men appeared from nowhere and came out very fast into the centre of the river，close to us． A fifth man was steering， and a sixth， his face hidden in his cloak， whispered instructions to the steerer．They all stared at us．
　　‘You have a convict there who's returned from Australia，'shouted the steerer．‘That's the man，in the cloak．His name is Abel Magwitch．I'm a Customs officer and I arrest him！’
　　Suddenly their boat was touching ours．The Hamburg ship was almost on top of us， and the ship's captain shouted the or-der to stop engines， but it was too late． At the same moment the Customs officer put his hand on Magwitch's shoulder，and Magwitch pulled the cloak off the other man in the boat．It was Compeyson！And as I watched，he fell backwards into the water，his face full of terror．The huge ship hit our tiny boat with a great crash，Somehow the Customs officers managed to get me on board their boat，with Herbert and Startop，but our boat sank，and the two convicts had disappeared．
　　Soon，however，we discovered Magwitch in the water，badly injured，and pulled him into the boat． He told me that he had fallen into the water with Compeyson，and then been hit by the ship．I believed what he said．At the time there was no sign of Compeyson，whose dead body was found several days later．
　　Magwitch was taken to prison to wait for his trial．I arranged for Jaggers to be his lawyer，but Jaggers warned me there was almost no hope of saving his life．Magwitch's thick wallet was handed over to the police，and Wemmick was quite annoyed with me about it．
　　‘Really， Mr Pip， to lose so much cash！’ he said．‘You see，Compeyson was so determined to get his revenge that you couldn't have saved Magwitch． But you certainly could have saved the cash．That's the difference． But could I ask you something， Mr Pip？ Would you come for a walk with me on Monday morning？’
　　It seemed a strange request， and although I did not really feel like accepting， he politely insisted．
　　I arrived at the Castle early on Monday morning， and after a glass of rum and milk， we set out on the road．
　　‘Well，well！’ said Wemmick suddenly．‘Here's a church！Let's go in！’And when we were inside，there was another surprise．
　　‘Well，well！’ he said again．‘Look what I've found in my pockets！Let's put them on！’As he had‘found’two pairs of white gloves，and his post-box mouth was as wide as it could possibly be，I began to suspect something．And when I saw the Aged come in with a lady，I knew I was right．
　　‘Well，well！'said Wemmick，still pretending to be sur-prised，‘here's the Aged，and Miss Skiffins！ Let's have a wedding！’
　　And so wemmick was married to Miss Skiffins， and we all celebrated afterwards at a little pub near the church．
　　I was delighted for Wemmick，but I could not stop worrying about Magwitch．He had been so badly injured that he was moved to the prison hospital，where I visited him every day．I read to him， and talked to him， and did everything I could to make him comfortable． But day by day I watched him becom-ing weaker，although he never complained．To the prison guards he was a dangerous criminal， but to me he was an un-fortunate man，who had at least some goodness in him．I could not leave him now．
　　At his trial Jaggers was proved right． The judge decided that Magwitch，a convict sent away for life who had returned，must be hanged．I could not accept this terrible punishment，and wrote to all the important people I could think of， asking for mercy for Magwitch．But all of them refused to help．
　　I noticed，on my daily visits to him， that he was getting much worse．He lay in bed，looking calmly at the white ceiling．Sometimes he could not speak，and just pressed my hand．One evening as I entered his room， he smiled weakly at me．
　　‘Dear boy，’he said，‘you're never late．’
　　‘I don't want to lose a moment of the time I'm allowed to visit you，’I said．
　　‘Thank you， dear boy．God bless you！You've never de serted me，dear boy！’ He had spoken his last words．
　　I touched his chest，remembering that I had wanted to desert him once．He put both his hands on mine．
　　‘Dear Magwitch，listen to me．You had a child once， who you loved and lost．’He pressed my hand gently．‘She's alive．She's a lady and very beautiful．And I love her！’
　　He was too weak to speak any more， but he just managed to lift my hand to his lips．Then he looked peacefully up at the white ceiling again．Slowly his eyes closed and his head dropped quietly on to his chest．






■ 19 A wedding
　　The excitement of all these events made me seriously ill for several weeks．Herbert was abroad， on business for Clarrikers，and there would have been nobody to look after me， if Joe bad not heard about my illness and come to London to nurse me．
　　When I was getting better， he told me some of the local news．Miss Havisham had died，and left all her fortune to Estella，except for￡4000，which Matthew Pocket inherited．And Orlick had been arrested for breaking into Pumblechook's house and stealing his money．Dear old Joe seemed just the same， but as I got better，he began to remember I was a gentleman，and call me sir again，and when I got up one morning，I discovered he had gone．
　　I decided to go back to the village，to thank him for all his help，and to carry out a plan I had been considering for some time．I wanted to ask Biddy to marry me，and I knew I would be happy with her．So I went by coach to the old town，as I had done so many times before， and walked to the forge． But as I came closer，I could not hear the sound of Joe's hammer，and I noticed fresh white curtains at the windows， and bright flowers everywhere．Suddenly I saw Biddy and Joe at the door，arm in arm．
　　‘Pip！’cried Biddy happily，running to kiss me．‘Pip，it's my wedding day，and I'm married to Joe！’
　　I was still weak from my illness， and the shock was too much for me．They had to help me into the house and let me rest in a chair． They were both so pleased that I had come， by accident，to make their day perfect．I could only be glad that I had never spoken of my plan to Joe， when he was looking after me．
　　‘Dear Biddy，’I said，‘you have the best husband in the whole world．’
　　‘I couldn't love him more than I do，’ she replied．
　　‘And dear Joe， you have the best wife in the world， and she will make you as happy as even you deserve to be， dear good Joe！’Joe put his arm over his eyes．‘And Joe and Biddy， I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart for all you've done for me． Tell me you forgive me for not being grateful，and not being good． And think better of me in the future！’
　　‘Oh dear old Pip，'said Joe，‘God knows we forgive you，if there is anything to forgive！’
　　So I left the forge，and started a new life， working as a clerk for Clarrikers，Herbert's company． I was sent to the new office in India to take charge，while Herbert came back to England to marry his Clara．
　　Herbert and his wife invited me to live with them， and we all stayed out in India for many years．In the end I too became a partner in the company．We worked hard and honestly， and made good profits．
　　It was not until eleven years later that I returned to England and saw Biddy and Joe again，although I had been writing regularly to them．One evening in December I gently pushed open the old kitchen door， and there，sitting by the fire next to Joe，in my old place，was-Pip！Joe and Biddy's son had my name and looked just like me．They also had a little daughter，and were the happiest of parents．
　　‘Dear Pip，'said Biddy quietly to me after supper，‘have you quite forgotten her？ Tell me， as an old friend．’
　　‘My dear Biddy，I can never forget her． But that was all a dream， which has passed！’
　　But I was secretly planning to revisit Miss Havisham's old house， alone， as a way of remembering Estella． I had heard that her husband had been very cruel to her．They had separated，and then he had died two years ago．Perhaps she had remarried by now．
　　The old house had been knocked down， and there was nothing left but piles of stones in the garden． In the moonlight I walked sadly around，until suddenly I saw a woman's figure in the shadows．I went closer and then——
　　‘Estella！’I cried．
　　‘You recognize me？I have changed a lot，'she answered．
　　She was older，but still beautiful．I had never before seen such a soft light in those once proud eyes，or felt such a friend-ly touch of her once cold hand．
　　‘It's strange， Estella！ Afer so many years，we meet by chance，here，where we first met！’
　　‘Yes，it's strange．I haven't been here for years，although the land belongs to me．But tell me，you still live abroad？’
　　‘Yes，I still do．I'm doing well in India．’
　　‘I've often thought of you．Since-my husband-died，I have given you a place in my heart．’
　　‘You have always held your place in my heart，I answered．
　　There was silence for a few moments．
　　‘I didn't think I would say goodbye to you here，'she said．
　　‘It's painful saying goodbye，Estella．’
　　‘But last time you said，“God bless you， God forgive you！”You could say that to me now， now that I understand how much you loved me， now that I have suffered， now that I am a better person．Tell me we are friends．'she spoke more eagerly than I had ever heard her speak before．
　　‘We are friends，’ I said，taking her hand．
　　‘And will continue being friends，even when we are apart，'said Estella．
　　We walked，hand in hand， out of the old garden．As the morning mist had risen long ago when I first left the forge，so the evening mist was rising now，and in the clear moonlight I saw no shadow of another separation from her．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　David Copperfield by Charles Dickens





■ 1 David Copperfield's childhood
　　I was born at Blunderstone，in Suffolk， in the east of England，and was given my poor father's name，David Copperfield． Sadly， he never saw me He was much older than my mother when they married， and died six months before I was born． My father's death made my beautiful young mother very unhappy， and she knew she would find life extremely difficult with a new baby and no husband The richest and most important person in our family was my father's aunt，Miss Betsey Trotwood. She had in fact been married once， to a handsome young husband. But because he demanded money from her， and sometimes beat her， she decided they should separate He went abroad， and soon news came of his death. Miss Trotwood bought a small house by the sea， and lived there alone， with only one servant． She had not spoken to my father since his marriage， because she considered he had made a mistake in marrying a very young girl But just before I was born， when she heard that my mother was expecting a baby， she came to visit Blunder- stone.
　　It was a cold， windy Friday afternoon in March． My mother was sitting by the fire， feeling very lonely and unhappy， and crying a little. Suddenly a stern， strange-looking face appeared at the window. ‘Open the door！’ ordered the sternfaced lady． My mother was shocked，but obeyed at once． ‘You must be David Copper field's wife，’said the lady as she entered．‘I'm Betsey Trotwood． You've heard of me？’ ‘Yes，’whispered mother，trembling． ‘How young you are！’ cried Miss Betsey．‘Just a baby！’ My mother started sobbing again．‘I know I look like a child！ I know I was young to be a wife， and I'm young to be a mother！ But perhaps I'll die before I become a mother！’ ‘Come， come！ answered Miss Betsey.‘Have some tea．Then you'll feel better．What do you call your girl？’ ‘My girl？ I don't know yet that it will be a girl，’replied my mother miserably． ‘No，I don't mean the baby，I mean your servant！’
　　‘Her name's Peggotty． Her first name's Clara，the same as mine， so I call her by her family name，you see．’ ‘What a terrible name！ However， never mind． Peggotty！’she called， going to the door．‘Bring Mrs Copperfield some tea at once！’ She sat down again and continued speaking．‘You were talking about the baby． I'm sure it'll be a girl． Now， as soon as she’ s born…’ ‘He， perhaps，’ said my mother bravely． ‘Don’ t be stupid， of course it’ ll be a she．I'm going to send her to school，and educate her well． I want to prevent her from making the mistakes I've made in life．’ Miss Betsey looked quite angry as she said this． My mother said nothing，as she was not feeling at all well.‘But tell me， were you and your husband happy？’asked Miss Betsey．
　　This made my poor mother feel worse than ever.‘I know I wasn't very sensible—about money—or cooking—or things like that！’ she sobbed.‘But we loved each other—and he was helping me to learn—and then he died！Oh！Oh！’And she fell back in her chair， completely unconscious．
　　Peggotty， who came in just then with the tea，realized how serious the situation was， and took my mother upstairs to bed. The doctor arrived soon afterwards， and stayed all evening to take care of his patient.
　　At about midnight he came downstairs to the sitting－room where Miss Betsey was waiting impatiently．
　　‘Well，doctor, what's the news？ How is she？’
　　‘The young mother is quite comfortable， madam，’ replied the doctor politely．
　　‘But she， the baby， how is she？’ cried Miss Betsey．
　　The doctor looked strangely at Miss Betsey.‘It's a boy，madam，’ he replied．
　　Miss Betsey said nothing，but walked straight out of the house， and never came back．
　　That was how I was born. My early childhood was extremely happy， as my beautiful mother and kind Peggotty took care of me. But when I was about eight， a shadow passed over my happiness. My mother often went out walking，in her best clothes， with a gentleman called Mr Murdstone． He had black hair， a big black moustache and an unpleasant smile， and seemed to be very fond of my mother. But I knew that Peggotty did not like him． A few months later Peggotty told me that my mother was going to have a short holiday with some friends. Meanwhile Peggotty and I would go to stay with her brother Daniel in Yarmouth，on the east coast， for two weeks．I was very excited when we climbed into the cart， although it was sad saying goodbye to my mother． Mr Murdstone was at her shoulder，waving goodbye， as the driver called to his horse， and we drove out of the village． When we got down from the cart in Yarmouth，after our journey，Peggotty said， ‘That's the house，Master David！’ I looked all round， but could only see an old ship on the sand.‘Is that—that your brother's house？’I asked in delight. And when we reached it，I saw it had doors and windows and a chimney，just like a real house． I could not imagine a nicer place to live. Everything was clean and tidy， and smelt of fish． Now I was introduced to the Peggotty family．There was Daniel Peggotty， a kind old sailor． Although he was not married， he had adopted two orphans， who lived with him and called him Uncle． Ham Peggotty was a large young man with a gentle smile，and Emily was a beautiful，blue-eyed little girl. They all welcomed Peggotty and me warmly． I spent a wonderfully happy two weeks there， playing all day on the beach with Emily，and sleeping in my own little bed on the ship. I am sure I was in love with little Emily in my childish way， and I cried bitterly when we had to say goodbye at the end of the holiday． But on the way home to Blunderstone， Peggotty looked at me very worriedly.‘Master David，my dear，’she said suddenly in a trembling voice.‘I must tell you—you'll have to know now… While we've been away， your dear mother—has married Mr Murdstone！He's your stepfather now！’ I was deeply shocked． I could not understand how my mother could have married that man．And when we arrived home， I could not help showing my mother how very miserable I was． I went straight to my room and lay sobbing on my bed，which made my poor mother very unhappy too． As she sat beside me， holding my hand， Mr Murdstone suddenly came in． ‘What's this， Chara， my love？’ he asked sternly．‘Remember，you must be firm with the boy！I've told you before，you're too weak with him！’ ‘ Oh yes，Edward，I'm afraid you're right，’ my mother replied quickly．‘I'm very sorry． I'll try to be firmer with him．’ And when she left the room， Mr Murdstone whispered angrily to me，‘David，do you know what I'll do if you don't obey me？ I'll beat you like a dog！’ I was still very young，and I was very frightened of him． If he had said one kind word to me， perhaps I would have liked and trusted him，and my life would have been different. Instead， I hated him for the influence he had over my dear mother，who wanted to be kind to me， but also wanted to please her new husband． That evening Mr Murdstone's sister arrived to ‘help’my mother in the house． A tall dark lady， with a stern， frowning face，she looked and sounded very much like her brother．I thought she was planning to stay with us for a long time， and I was right．In fact，she intended to stay for ever． She started work the next morning. ‘Now， Clara，’ she said firmly to my mother at breakfast，‘I am here to help you. You’ re much too pretty and thoughtless to worry about the servants， the food and so on． So just hand me your keys to all the cupboards， and I'll take care of everything for you．’ My poor mother just blushed，looked a little ashamed，and obeyed. From then on， Miss Murdstone took complete control of the house， keeping the keys hanging from her waist as she hurried through the house，checking that everything was being done just as she wished.






■ 2 David is sent away to school
　　I was very unhappy during this time. Mr Murdstone insisted on my studying， and so my mother gave me lessons． In the past she and I had enjoyed our studies together， and she had taught me a lot in her gentle way. But now both Mr and Miss Murdstone were present during my lessons， and somehow I could not concentrate or remember what I had learnt. My poor mother was very sympathetic，and tried to encourage me，sometimes even whispering the answer to me. But the Murdstones had sharp ears． ‘Clara，my love！ ’Mr Murdstone used to say crossly.‘Remember！Be firm！You’ re making the boy's character worse by helping him like that！’ ‘Oh，Edward, I'm sorry,’my mother replied, looking embarrassed and hanging her head like a guilty child． One morning when I arrived in the sittingroom as usual for my lesson，I saw that Mr Murd stone had a thin stick in his hand. I could not take my eyes off it.
　　‘You must be very careful today， David,’ he said with his unpleasant smile， holding the stick in both hands． I knew what would happen then. A terrible fear took hold of me， and all that I had learnt disappeared immediately from my memory， so that I could not answer any of my mother's questions. Mr Murdstone got up from his chair. ‘Well David，’he said heavily,‘ I think you've worried your mother enough today. We'll go upstairs， boy. Come，’and he picked up the stick. I heard my mother crying as we went upstairs. ‘Please，Mr Murdstone！’I cried. ‘Don't beat me！I've tried to learn，really I have, sir！’ But he did not listen to me. In my bedroom，he held my arms and started hitting me with the stick. I managed to get hold of his hand， and bit deep into it. He cried out angrily，and began to hit me as hard as he could．Above the noise of my screams， I could hear my mother and Peggotty crying outside the door. Then the next moment， he was gone. I heard him lock the door. And I was lying， sore and bleeding, on the floor. The whole house seemed suddenly very quiet. I stayed there for a time， without moving. In the evening Miss Murdstone brought me some bread and milk， which she left on the floor beside me，frowning angrily at me as she went out. I was kept locked in that room for five days and nights，and saw nobody except Miss Murdstone， who brought me food but never spoke to me. To a small boy， the five days seemed like years，and I can still remember how frightened and guilty I felt． But during the fifth night I heard a strange noise at the key-hole. It was Peggotty，trying to give me a message．
　　‘Master David，my dear，’she whispered, sobbing，‘they are going to send you away to boarding school！ Tomorrow！’ ‘Oh Peggotty！’ I cried.‘Then I won't see you and mother very often！’ ‘No， my love. But don't forget， I'll take care of your mother. She needs her cross old Peggotty！ I'll stay with her，although I hate these Murdstones. And remember，David, I love you as much as I love your mother，and more. And I'll Write to you.’ ‘Thank you，dear Peggotty！’I whispered back, tears rolling down my face.‘Will you write to your brother too，and Ham，and little Emily, and tell them I'm not as bad as the Murdstones think？ And send my love to them，especially little Emily？’ Peggotty promised to do what I asked. The next morning Miss Murdstone told me that because of my wickedness I was going away to school．She had already packed my case for me. My mother was only allowed to say a very quick goodbye to me， when the horse and cart arrived The driver put my case on the cart， and we drove slowly out of Blunderstone. I was still sobbing loudly when suddenly I saw Peggotty running after us on the road. The driver stopped and waited for her. With difficulty she climbed up onto the cart.
　　‘Here， Master David！’ she cried breathlessly.‘A little present from me and your dear mother！Take care of yourself， my dear！’She put a small purse and a paper bag into my hands，and held me so close to her fat body that I thought I would never breathe again. Then she jumped down and ran back along the road to the village．
　　As we continued our journey， I dried my tears and looked at what she had given me. The bag was full of Peggotty’ s special cakes， and in the purse were eight bright shilling coins. Thinking of my mother and Peggotty made me start crying again，but just then the driver, Mr Barkis, began to talk to me. He was a large，red-faced man, who clearly found conversation difficult.
　　‘Did she make those cakes？’ he asked slowly， having finished the one that I had offered him.
　　‘You mean Peggotty， sir？ Yes, she does all our cooking.’
　　‘Does she？’ replied Mr Barkis with great interest. There was a long silence while he considered his next question．
　　‘Does she have a young man？’he asked．‘You know，someone who wants to marry her？’
　　‘Peggotty？A young man？’I repeated，surprised.‘Oh no,she's never had any young men.’
　　‘Ah！’ replied Mr Barkis，looking very pleased. Again he thought for a long time before speaking.
　　‘Well，’he said at last,‘ perhaps if you write to her—will you be writing to her？ You could give her a message from me. You could say “Barkis is willing”． Would you do that？’
　　‘“Barkis is willing”，’ I repeated innocently， wondering what the message meant.‘Yes，of course. But you could tell her yourself， Mr Barkis, when you return to Blunderstone tomorrow．’
　　‘No，no’ he said, ‘ no,you just give her the message. Remember，“Barkis is willing”.’ After this conversation Mr Barkis was completely silent for the rest of the journey. When we arrived in Yarmouth，I bought paper at the hotel and wrote this letter to Peggotty： My dear Peggotty， I have arrived safely in Yarmouth. Barkis is willing. Please give my love to mother. Yours，David P.S. He says it's important—Barkis is willing.In Yarmouth I was put on the long－distance coach to London，and travelled all through the night. At the coach station in London I was collected by a teacher， Mr Mell, and taken to Salem House， the school which the Murdstones had chosen for me.
　　The school was a large old building with a dusty playground， surrounded by a high brick wall. It looked strangely deserted. I was very surprised to find that none of the boys were there， and was told that they were all on holiday， and that I had been sent there during the holidays as a punishment for my wickedness. The headmaster and teachers were on holiday too，all except for Mr Mell, who had to look after me. I spent a whole month in that miserable place，doing my lessons in the dirty， empty classroom, which smelt of old food and unwashed boys. Every evening I had to eat my supper with Mr Mell，and then go straight to bed. The worst thing was the sign I had to wear round my neck. It said： BE CAREFUL！HE BITES. I was only allowed to take it off when I went to bed. Although I was extremely lonely and unhappy at this time，I was not looking forward to meeting all the other boys. I felt sure they would laugh at me and especially at the sign I was forced to wear. But one day Mr Mell told me that the headmaster， Mr Creakle, had returned, and wanted to see me. So I went，trembling，to his part of the house. I realized at once that Mr Creakle lived much more comfortably than the boys or the teachers. He was a small， fat man with a purple nose， who was sitting in an armchair with a bottle and a glass in front of him.
　　‘So， this is the boy who bites, is it？’ he asked unpleasantly.‘I know your stepfather， boy. He's a man of strong character，he is. He knows me,and I know him. Do you know me？ Answer me，boy！’He pulled violently at my ear．
　　‘Not yet， sir,’ I answered, tears of pain in my eyes. ‘Ah，but you soon will！Oh yes, I have a strong character too，you'll see！’ He banged his hand hard on the table． I was very frightened，but I made myself ask the question I had been considering for a whole month.‘ Please， sir, I'm very sorry for what I did to Mr Murdstone. Could—could I take this sign off，before the other boys see it…’ Mr Creakle gave a sudden，terrible shout and jumped out of his chair. I did not wait to see whether he was going to hit me， but ran out of his room and hid in my bed for the next hour. However， the boys were not as cruel to me as I had feared. I made a friend almost immediately， a boy called Tommy Traddles， who was known to be the unluckiest boy in the school. I was also noticed， and even smiled on, by the great James Steerforth，one of the oldest boys, at least six years older than me. He was a handsome，intelligent, curly-haired young man， who had become an important figure at the school，with great influence over the younger boys.
　　‘How much money have you got，Copperfield？’ he asked me.
　　‘Eight shillings，Steerforth，’I answered，remembering the present my mother and Peggotty had given me.
　　‘You'd better give it to me. I'll take care of it for you，’ he offered in a friendly way.
　　I opened Peggotty's purse and turned it upside-down into his hand．
　　‘Perhaps you'd like to spend some of it now？’he suggested，smiling.‘A bottle of wine, a tin of biscuits, a few cakes， that sort of thing？I can go out whenever I like, so I can buy it for you.’ ‘Ye-es，that’ s very kind of you, ’I said, although I was a little worried that all my money would disappear. When we went upstairs to bed， I realized that all my money had been spent， as eight shillings’ worth of food and drink was laid out on my bed in the moonlight. Of course I did not want to eat and drink it all by myself， so I invited Steerforth and the others to help themselves. The boys were very willing， and we spent a pleasant evening, sitting on our beds，whispering to each other. I discovered that the boys all hated Salem House， which they considered one of the worst schools in the country. They especially hated Mr Creakle， who was in the habit of beating them regularly with a heavy stick which he carried with him at all times. The only boy he dared not beat was Steerforth. I admired Steerforth even more when I heard this. When we were all too tired to stay awake， Steerforth got up to go.‘Goodnight，young Copperfield， ’ he said, putting a hand on my head.‘I'll take care of you．’
　　‘It’ s very kind of you，’ I replied gratefully.
　　‘You haven’ t got a sister， have you？’he asked sleepily. ‘No， I haven't, ’I answered. ‘What a pity！ If you had one， I'm sure she'd be a pretty, bright-eyed little girl. I would have liked to meet her.’ I thought of him a lot that night，with his laughing, hand-some face， and his careless, confident manner. I could never have imagined what a dark shadow he would throw over the lives of people who were dear to me. I stayed at Salem House for three more months. Although one or two of the teachers，like Mr Mell, were kind to us boys，and tried to teach us properly, we were too afraid of Mr Creakle and his stick to concentrate on our studies. But Tom-my Traddles and I cheered each other up if we were beaten，and I was lucky enough to be friendly with the great Steerforth，in spite of the difference in our ages. However， my home, even with the Murdstones there, seemed a much pleasanter place than school， and I was glad when the Christmas holidays arrived， and I was allowed to return to Blunderstone. I was a little surprised to find that my mother had a new baby， and I could see at once that she was not well. She looked tired and worried，and very thin. But she and Peggotty were delighted to see me， although they dared not show it if the Murdstones were present. My stepfather and his sister seemed to hate me even more than before， if that were possible， and they made my life quite miserable whenever they could. In fact， I was almost pleased when it was time to return to school， and see Traddles and Steerforth again. As the cart drove away， I remember my mother standing outside our house，with her baby in her arms, smiling sadly at me. That was the last time I saw her，and that is how I shall always remember her.






■ 3 David the orphan
　　Life went on as normal for me at school，until my birthday two months later in March. I remember that day very well. It was cold，icy weather, and we boys had to blow on our fingers and rub our hands to keep warm in the freezing classrooms. When a message came for me to go and see Mr Creakle， I thought that Peggotty must have sent me a birthday present，and so I hurried gladly along to his room. But there I realized something unusual had happened，because it was Mr Creakle’ s wife who was waiting to speak to me. ‘David， my child, ’ she said kindly, holding my hand, ‘we all have to accept that our loved ones can die at any moment.’ I looked at her， trying to understand what she meant.
　　‘I'm sorry to tell you，’she continued, ‘that your mother is dangerously ill.’ There was a mist in front of my eyes， and suddenly burning tears ran down my face. I knew the truth.
　　‘Your mother is dead，’ she said. I was already sobbing loudly and I felt I was an orphan，quite alone in the world. Mrs Creakle packed my case herself， and sent me home on the coach for the funeral. I did not realize at the time that I would never return to Salem House. When I arrived home，Peggotty met me at the door, and we cried miserably in each other’ s arms. Mr Murdstone seemed very sad， and did not speak to me at all. Miss Murdstone, however，showed her usual firmness of character（ which she and her brother were so proud of） by checking that I had brought all my clothes back from school. After that she showed no interest in me at all.There was a deathly stillness in the house. Peggotty took me up to the room where my dear mother's dead body lay，with my little brother, who had died a few hours after her. Everything was fresh and clean in the room， but I could not look at my mother's lovely face, which would never smile at me again， without crying. ‘How did it happen，Peggotty？’I asked, sobbing. ‘She was ill for a long time， Master David. She got worse after the baby was born， you see. She was sometimes unhappy and forgetful， but she was always the same to me, her old Peggotty. Those two downstairs often spoke crossly to her and made her sad， but she still loved them， you know—she was so sweet and loving！I always sat beside her while she went to sleep. It made her feel better， she said. There was a short silence while Peggotty dried her eyes， then took both my hands in hers.‘On the last night，she asked me for some water, and then gave me such a patient smile！She looked so beautiful！The sun was beginning to rise， and she put her head on my arm， on her stupid cross old Peggotty's arm, and died like an innocent child going to sleep！’ After my mother's funeral，I began to wonder what would happen to me. The Murdstones did not even seem to notice that I was in the house. They had told Peggotty to leave，as they did not what her as their servant any more，so Peggotty was going to her brother's in Yarmouth， until she decided what work to do next. She suggested taking me with her for a holiday， and to my surprise the Murdstones agreed. So next morning Mr Barkis appeared at the door with his cart， and Peggotty's cases were put on it. We climbed up and sat beside him. Peggotty was naturally a little sad to leave her old home， where she had been so happy with my mother and me， and at first she cried a little. But when Mr Barkis saw her drying her eyes and looking more cheerful， he too began to look happier， and he whispered to me, ‘Barkis is willing！You told her that！’ Aloud he said to Peggotty，‘Are you comfortable？’
　　Peggotty laughed and said that she was.
　　‘And are you comfortable，Master David？’be asked.
　　I said that I was. Mr Barkis was so pleased with this conversation that he repeated it many times during the journey，and Peggotty and I both had to keep giving him the same answer.
　　When we arrived in Yarmouth and got down from the cart，we said goodbye to Mr Barkis. Daniel and Ham Peggotty were waiting for us. Daniel and Ham were exactly the same as I remembered them，cheerful and generous as ever, but little Emily seemed different somehow She was taller and prettier， but she did not want to play with me， or spend her time with me. I was rather disappointed， because I still considered she was the most beautiful girl I had ever seen， and I thought I was in love with her. Daniel and Ham were very proud of her intelligence and beauty， and just smiled when she laughingly refused to sit next to me. But they all listened with interest to my stories of school life at Salem House. I told them about the other boys， especially the handsome, clever Steerforth. I admired him so much that I could not stop myself telling them all about him. Suddenly I noticed that Emily was listening eagerly， her blue eyes shining and a smile on her lips. She blushed when she saw that we were all looking at her， and hid her face behind her hands. ‘Emily's like me，’said Peggotty kindly, ‘and would like to see David's friend Mr Steerforth.’ The days passed happily，although Emily and I did not play together as we had done before. Mr Barkis was a frequent visitor，and soon Peggotty explained to me that she had decided to marry him. ‘I’ ll love you just as much， David, my dear, when I'm married！’ she told me， holding me close to her.‘And I'll be able to come and see you in the cart any time I like. Barkis is a good man and I'm sure I'll be happy with him. He’ s got a nice little house，and I'll keep a little bedroom there for you to use whenever you want. You'll always be welcome to come and stay！’So when I returned to Blunderstone， Peggotty had become Mrs Barkis， and I was glad to think of her in her own house，with a husband to take care of her. At home， my stepfather and his sister did not seem pleased to see me， and were clearly trying to find a way of getting rid of me. As they considered school too expensive， they finally arranged for me to start work， although I was still only ten years old, and very small for my age. I was sent to London，to work in a warehouse in the east of the city， near the river. My job was to wash bottles， which would then be filled with wine， or to pack the filled bottles in cases. I was paid only six shillings a week. There were several other boys who worked with me，but I was the only one who had been to school. All the warehouse workers were coarse， rough people, who were used to working in dirty conditions for long hours. No words can describe the horror I felt， when I realized what my life was going to be like from now on. I was deeply ashamed at having such a job and I was also afraid that I would forget everything I had learnt from my mother and my teachers. I would never find friends like Traddles or Steerforth， or be able to get a better position in life. It was an extremely unhappy time for me. My stepfather had asked Mr Quinion， the manager, to find me somewhere to stay in London，so at the end of my first day I was called to Mr Quinion's office and introduced to an important-looking， rather fat, middle-aged man with a head as bald as an egg. His name was Mr Micawber，and he offered me a spare room in the house he was renting with his family. I agreed to take it， and Mr Micawber and I walked home together. The Micawbers were obviously very poor， but tried hard not to let this show. The house had several floors of rather dirty，empty rooms with very little furniture. Mrs Micawber was a thin，tired-looking woman with a baby in her arms. The baby was one of twins，and in all my experience of the family, I never saw Mrs Micawber without at least one of the twins. They also had a four-year-old son and a three-year-old daughter. Their only servant was a young orphan girl. ‘ I never thought， ’Mrs Micawber told me sadly as she showed me my room，‘ when I lived with Mother and Father, before I was married，that I would ever be as poor as this. But as Mr Micawber is for the moment in difficulties，I must of course accept the situation. I'm afraid he owes a lot of money，but his creditors will just have to wait！ You can't get blood out of a stone， nor can anyone get any money at all out of Mr Micawber at present！’ I soon realized that neither Mr nor Mrs Micawger had ever been able to manage money.The little that Mr Micawber earned was not enough， either to keep his creditors happy, or to pay for the needs of his growing family. So his creditors were constantly at the door， demanding payment, and meals were rather irregular in the Micawber house. Mr and Mrs Micawber's moods varied according to the situation. One moment Mr Micawber looked extremely miserable and depressed，the next he was brushing his shoes and singing a song before going out. Mrs Micawber's character was similar to her hus band's. Sometimes I came home to find her lying on the floor，with her hair undone， looking wild and desperate, but an hour later she was cheerfully eating a good supper. I lived with these kind people for several months， and became very fond of them. I bought my own food out of my wages，because I knew the Micawbers hardly ever had enough for themselves，and I lived mostly on bread and cheese. As they were so short of money， once or twice I offered to lend them a few shillings，which they refused to accept.But at last Mr Micawber's creditors became tired of waiting for their money，and went to the police, who arrested him for debt. He was taken to the King's Prison， and asked me to visit him there. When I arrived，I was shown to his room, where he was waiting for me. He seemed quite brokenhearted， and even cried a little.
　　‘This is a black day for me，Copperfield！’ he sobbed.‘I hope my mistakes will be a warning to young people like you！Remember，if a man earns twenty pounds a year, and spends nineteen pounds and nineteen shillings， the result is happiness. But if he spends twenty pounds and one shilling，the result is misery！ By the way， Copperfield，could you lend me a shilling for some beer？ Mrs Micawber will pay you back as soon as you arrive home. ’ And when the beer arrived， he appeared much more cheerful. We had a pleasant evening，telling stories and jokes. He stayed in prison for several weeks， and I visited him regularly．I was delighted to hear on one of my visits that he would soon be free， as his creditors had unwillingly accepted the fact that he had no way of paying his debts. I gave the news to Mrs Micawber when I returned home. We celebrated by sharing our supper and a glass of wine together. ‘May I ask what you will do， madam, when Mr Micawber is free？’I asked politely. ‘My family，’ said Mrs Micawber grandly, ‘believe that Mr Micawber should move to the country， to Devon, and carry on his business interests there. Mr Micawber is a very clever man， Master Copperfield.’
　　‘I'm sure he is，’ I agreed. ‘Although they haven't found anything exactly right for him yet，my family think he should be ready, in Devon, in case something turns up.’She put down her empty glass. ‘And will you be going with him， madam？’ I asked. ‘I must！I will！’Mrs Micawber's voice rose to a scream.‘He is my life！ My love！My husband！ The father of my children！ I will never desert Mr Micawber！ You can't ask me to desert him！’ I felt very uncomfortable，as I had not asked her to desert him at all， but she soon became calm again and finished her supper.I was becoming used to the Micawbers’ changes of mood. I now realized that when the Micawbers left London， as they were planning to do， I would be very lonely in the city. I still hated my work in the warehouse， and wanted to make a better life for myself.I thought about it for a long time， and decided there was only one thing I could do. I would try to find my one surviving relation，my father's aunt, Miss Betsey Trotwood， and ask her to help me. I knew she lived somewhere near Dover，in Kent.I could go there by coach, be-cause Peggotty had once sent me ten shillings to keep，in case I ever needed it.The time had come to use that money.






■ 4 David and his aunt
　　So，after helping the Micawbers to pack their few clothes，and waving goodbye to them at the coach sta-tion on their way to Devon，I went to the warehouse for my last day at work．I did not tell anyone I would not be coming back the following week. In the evening I packed my case，and put the ten shillings in the little purse Peggotty had once given me．I looked around for someone to help me with my case， which was rather heavy for me, and saw a tall young man with a horse and cart passing by．
　　‘Could you please take my case to the coach station？’ I asked him politely． The young man put the case into his cart. Then， looking round quickly to make sure there were no witnesses， he pushed me roughly against the wall and took my purse out of my trembling hand. Before I could say a word， he had driven the horse and cart down the road and out of sight round the corner.I knew I would never see him， my case or my ten shillings again． I sat down on the pavement and cried. Now I had lost ev－erything I owned in the world， and had no money for the coach fare to Dover．In the end I decided I would have to walk there， and I started the long journey. It took me six days to cover the hundred kilometres， as I got tired very easily, and had to rest．I sold my jacket for a shilling，so that I could buy bread and milk on the way，and at night I slept in disused farm buildings or under trees．Sometimes I was afraid of the dangerous－looking beggars and thieves I met on the road，but I knew I had to keep going．As I walked，I thought of my mother's gentle，pretty face．I felt sure she would approve of what I was doing，and that encouraged me to continue．
　　But when I arrived in Dover，it seemed a much larger town than I had imagined．I spent a whole morning asking people if they knew where Miss Betsey Trotwood lived．Finally I found someone who recognized the name and showed me the way to her house．I stood at her front door，in the neat little garden，for a few moments，trembling with fear，and wondering what my aunt would think of me．My face and hands were dirty，my hair was unbrushed，and my clothes were torn and dusty．Perhaps she wouldn't even want to invite me into her house！
　　Just then a handsome but strict－looking grey－haired woman came out of the door towards me．I knew she must be my aunt．
　　‘Go away！'she said crossly．‘I don't allow anyone to walk on my grass！’
　　‘Please，madam，’I said bravely，‘please，aunt…’
　　‘WHAT？’cried Miss Betsey in great surprise．
　　‘Please，aunt，I'm your nephew．’
　　‘Good heavens！’she cried，and sat down rather suddenly on the grass．
　　‘I'm David Copper field，your nephew's son，of Blunder stone in Suffolk，where you came on the night I was born，and saw my dear mother．I've been very unhappy since she died．My stepfather sent me to work in London，and I hated it，and ran away，and someone stole my case and my money，and I've had to walk all the way，and I haven't slept in a bed for six nights！’Here my selfcontrol broke，and I fell to the ground，sobbing bitterly．
　　My aunt jumped to her feet，picked me up and took me into her sitting-room，where she mixed some medicine in a glass and made me drink it．She also wrapped me in a large blanket and put me on her sofa．Then she rang the bell for her servant，Janet．
　　‘Please ask Mr Dick to come here，Janet，’she said．
　　A tall，grey－haired，pleasant－looking gentleman entered a few minutes later，laughing rather strangely to himself．
　　‘Now，Mr Dick，’said my aunt firmly，‘don't be a fool，because we all know you're intelligent．’Mr Dick looked very serious at once．‘No doubt you remember that I had a nephew，David Copperfield？Well，this is his son．He has run away．’
　　‘Oh，really？David's son！Run away！Well！’said Mr Dick．
　　‘Now the question is，Mr Dick，what shall I do with him？’
　　‘Well—’Mr Dick looked vacantly at me，and then sudden ly his eyes shone．‘If I were you，I would wash him！’
　　‘Well done，Mr Dick！You always have the right answer！’said my aunt delightedly．
　　And so they washed me，and gave me clean clothes and deli cious food．While I was eating，my aunt stared at me，occa sionally whispering‘Good heavens！’to herself．When she could see that I felt better，she asked me question after ques tion，and I told her the story of my life．
　　‘Good heavens！’she said again，when I had finished．‘Why did your poor mother marry again？What a terrible mis take！’
　　‘Perhaps she was in love，’suggested Mr Dick，smiling his rather foolish smile．
　　‘In love！’said Miss Betsey crossly．‘Perhaps the poor silly girl thought she was in love！But now，Mr Dick，another question．What should we do with the boy？’
　　‘Well—'said Mr Dick，thinking．Then an idea suddenly came to him．‘You should put him to bed！’
　　‘Thank you again，Mr Dick，for your common sense！’said my aunt happily．‘Janet，put the boy to bed！’
　　And so，in a comfortable clean little bed，in a pleasant airy room at the top of Miss Betsey Trotwood's house，I floated away into the world of my dreams．
　　At breakfast next morning I bravely asked my aunt，‘Are you—have you—what's going to happen to me？’
　　‘I've written to your stepfather，’she replied．
　　‘Oh！Are you going to send me back to the Murdstones？Please don't，aunt！Please let me stay here！’I cried，trembling．
　　‘I don't know what I'll do yet． We'll have to wait and see，’she answered firmly．
　　This news made me very depressed，but there was nothing I could do about it and my aunt soon began to talk about some thing else．
　　‘What do you think of Mr Dick，child？’
　　‘He looks a little—well，mad．Is he mad，aunt？’
　　‘Well，his family called him mad，and wanted to lock him up for ever．But I met him，and thought—I still think—he's an extremely sensible，intelligent person．So I offered to take care of him，and he's lived in my house for ten years．Nobody knows what useful advice he's given me！I trust him com pletely！’
　　When I heard how generous my aunt had been to poor harmless Mr Dick，I began to understand her character better．In spite of her stern appearance and frequent crossness，she was very kind to people who needed her help．I hoped she would be kind to me．
　　Several days later，I was looking out of the sitting－room window when I saw Mr and Miss Murdstone riding into my aunt's garden．My aunt had seen them too，and hurried out，waving her umbrella angrily at them and shouting．‘Go away！Don't ride on my grass！Who do you think you are？Go away，I tell you！’
　　‘Aunt！’I cried out．‘They're Mr and Miss Murdstone！’
　　‘I don't care！’she shouted．‘Nobody is allowed to ride on my grass！’And she went back into her house，banging the door behind her．The Murdstones had to lead their horses out of the garden，and then return to ring the doorbell．They looked very uncomfortable and unsure of themselves．Janet showed them into the sitting－room，where my aunt，Mr Dick and I were waiting．
　　‘Miss Trotwood—’began Mr Murdstone，stepping forward．
　　‘Excuse me，’said my aunt sharply．‘I imagine you are the Mr Murdstone who married my nephew's widow．In my opinion，it would have been much better if you had never mar ried the poor Child．’
　　‘I agree with you，Miss Trotwood，’said Miss Murdstone，smiling falsely．‘My brother would certainly have been happi er if he hadn't married her，because I consider poor dear Clara was，in fact，just a child．’
　　‘Fortunately，’said my aunt，‘you and I，madam，are too old and plain for anyone to say that about us．’
　　Miss Murdstone did not seem eager to agree to this．Her brother，however，wanted to get down to business．
　　‘Miss Trotwood，’he said，a little crossly，‘having received your letter，I've come to explain to you，in case you haven't realized it yet，that this boy is extremely wicked and violent．Both my sister and I have tried to change his character，but sadly we have failed．’
　　‘I must add，’said Miss Murdstone，‘that of all the boys in the world，I believe this is the worst boy．’
　　‘I see，’said my aunt．‘Now tell me，has David inherited any money from his father or mother？’
　　‘No，madam，’answered Mr Murdstone．‘My dear Clara naturally trusted me to take care of David，and I'm ready to do that，if he comes back with me now．But I alone shall de cide what to do with him，Miss Trotwood—understand that．I am here，for the first and last time，to take him away．If you decide to keep him with you，you keep him for ever．’
　　‘What do you say，David？’asked my aunt，turning to me．
　　‘Please don't let me go with them，aunt！’I begged．‘They've always been unkind to me，and they made my mother very unhappy．I'll be so miserable if I have to go back with them！’
　　‘What do you think，Mr Dick？’asked my aunt．
　　Mr Dick thought for a moment．‘Get a suit of clothes made for him immediately，’he said．
　　‘What would I do without you，Mr Dick！’asked my aunt，shaking his hand enthusiastically．Then she turned to Mr Murdstone．
　　‘You'd better go．I'll keep the boy and take my chance with him．I don't believe a word of your story．Do you think I don't know how you broke that poor girl's heart？And how you hated her son，and punished him for it？I can see by your face that I'm right．’We all stared at Mr Murdstone．It was true that his face was white and he was breathing fast．‘Good bye，sir，and goodbye to you too，madam，’added my aunt，turning suddenly to Miss Murdstone．‘If I see you riding on my grass again，I'll knock your hat right off your head！’
　　The Murdstones said nothing in reply to these fierce words，but walked quickly out of the house．
　　‘Thank you，thank you，aunt！’I cried．‘I'll do my best to make you proud of me！’and I kissed her many times．
　　‘Mr Dick，you and I will adopt this boy together，’said my aunt，her stern expression softening into a smile．
　　And so a new life began for me．I was soon able to forget the warehouse and the Murdstones，in learning to please my aunt，and to play games with Mr Dick，who spent much of his time with me．
　　But one day my aunt suggested that I should go to boarding school in Canterbury．I was delighted，as I was eager to con tinue my studies，and Canterbury was very near my aunt's home in Dover．So the next day my aunt and I went to Can terbury，where I admired the beautiful old buildings in the an cient city centre．
　　‘Is it a large school，aunt？’I asked politely．
　　‘I haven't decided which school you'll go to yet，’she replied．‘First we're going to ask my old friend Mr Wickfield's advice about it．He lives and works in Canterbury，you see．’
　　Soon we stopped in front of a very old house，with a very clean front doorstep，and fresh white curtains at the windows．A strange-looking person，dressed in black，with short red hair and a very thin white face came out to meet us．I thought he must be a servant．He was about fifteen，but looked much older．
　　‘Is Mr Wickfield at home，Uriah Heep？’asked my aunt．
　　‘He is，madam，’replied Uriah，smiling unpleasantly．He showed us into the sitting-room，where I noticed two large paintings on the wall，one of a grey-haired gentleman and the other of a lady with a sweet，gentle face．Just then a gentle man entered the room，looking a little older than his picture．I soon discovered he was Mr Wickfield，my aunt's lawyer．
　　‘Mr Wickfield，’said my aunt，‘this is my nephew．I have adopted him，and I want to send him to a good boarding school here in Canterbury．Can you help me find a school for him？’
　　Mr Wickfield thought for a moment．‘There's a very good school I can recommend，Dr Strong's，but the boy can't board there，and it's too far to travel from Dover every day．However，he could live here，if you liked，in my house．There's plenty of room for him．’
　　‘That's very kind of you，Mr Wickfield．I'll pay you for his food，of course，’said my aunt．
　　‘Come and meet Agnes，who takes care of everything and manages the house，’said Mr Wickfield．We all went upstairs to another sitting-room，prettily furnished，where a girl of my own age was sitting．On her face I saw immediately the beau tiful，calm expression of the lady in the painting downstairs，and I knew she must be Mr Wickfield's daughter，Agnes．When I saw the way Mr Wickfield looked at Agnes and held her hand，I realized that she was the only thing that made life worth living for him．The lady in the painting was her mother，who had died some years before，and Agnes was now in complete charge of the house．She welcomed me warmly as a guest，and showed me the comfortable bedroom I would sleep in．My aunt was very happy to leave me in the care of Mr Wickfield and his daughter．
　　‘I must leave now，David，’she told me．‘Mr Wickfield will take you to school tomorrow，and make all the arrange ments． I'm sure you will work hard，and do well．’
　　‘Thank you，aunt！’I said，trying not to cry．‘And give my love to Mr Dick！And thank you again！’
　　When she had gone，I dried my tears and spent a pleasant evening with the Wickfields．We ate supper and talked in the pretty little sitting－room．Agnes played the piano and tried to amuse her father，but he often looked serious and rather sad．During the evening he drank a good deal of wine．I wondered why he seemed unhappy．
　　The next day I had my first experience of a well－organized school．It could not have been more different from Salem House．The headmaster，Dr Strong，was a gentle，kind man who enjoyed teaching and never punished anybody．I soon made friends with the other boys，and as time went on，with the teachers too．But although I liked school very much，I was always happy to return to the Wickfields’quiet house every evening．There，Agnes used to help me with my studies and listen sympathetically to my problems，and her father always seemed pleased to see me．I often wrote to my aunt and Peg gotty，and Mr Dick came to visit me once a week．
　　The strangest person in my new life was Uriah Heep．Soon after I arrived in Canterbury，we had a conversation one evening．He was doing a lot of Mr Wickfield's work，and was working late in his small office，just off the hall of the Wick fields’house．
　　‘Come in，come in，Master Copperfield！’he cried when he saw me passing the door．I entered，and found him reading a large dusty book，and making careful notes in a notebook．
　　‘What are you studying，Uriah？’I asked politely．
　　‘I'm going to be a lawyer，’he replied，rubbing his thin hands together and smiling his oily smile．
　　‘You're Mr Wickfield's assistant，aren't you？Perhaps one day you'll be his partner，’I said，trying to make conversation．
　　‘Oh no，Master Copperfield！’cried Uriah，rolling his eyes upwards．‘I could never rise so high！No，I'm much too humble for that！But thank you，Master Copperfield，for thinking kindly of me．And may I say，that if ever you have the time（and I'm sure a young gentleman like you is much too busy to spare the time for a poor person like me），my mother and I would be glad to offer you a cup of tea at our humble home．’
　　‘Of course—if I have time，’I answered，and left the room quickly．I did not feel comfortable with him，for some reason．
　　But the following week he invited me to tea again，and I did not want to appear rude，so I agreed．That evening he and I walked to the small house where he lived with his mother．It was a warm day and we were drinking our tea near the open door when a gentleman I recognized passed by．It was Mr Mi cawber！He saw me sitting near the door and called out．‘Cop perfield！Is it really you？’
　　I was delighted to see him again，and Mrs Heep invited him in for some tea．I had to introduce him to the Heeps，but I did not think that Uriah would be a good influence on Mr Micaw ber．However，I was interested to discover that the Micawbers were now living in Canterbury，as nothing had‘turned up’in Devon．They seemed to be very short of money again，and surrounded by creditors as usual．I left the Heeps’house as soon as possible，taking Mr Micawber with me，as I did not want him to tell Uriah all about my life at the warehouse in London．
　　And so the years passed．I learnt everything that Dr Strong and his teachers could teach me，and at seventeen，came to the end of my schooldays．My aunt suggested that，before decid ing what profession to choose，I should spend a month in Lon don or travelling round the country．This would give me time to consider my next step．I agreed enthusiastically，and al though I was sorry to say goodbye to my sweet friend Agnes and her father，I was looking forward to leading the life of an independent young gentleman．






■ 5 David meets old friends again
　　I decided to go to London first，to stay at a hotel for a few nights，and see all the sights of that great city．I knew it would be very different from the last time I was in London，when I was working at the warehouse．Now I was adult，and educated，and had money．
　　The hotel I chose was called the Golden Cross，and because I looked so young，I was given a very small，dark room in the roof．But I did not feel confident enough to complain．
　　That evening I was returning from the theatre when I recognized someone going into the hotel．I could not prevent my self from saying at once，‘Steerforth！Do you remember me？’
　　He stared at me for a moment．Then he cried，‘Good heavens！It's little Copperfield！’
　　I was so delighted to see him that I held both his hands，saying，‘My dear Steerforth，you have no idea how pleased I am to see you again！’I remembered how much I had admired him，and all my love for him came back．I had to brush away the tears from my eyes．
　　‘Don't cry，Copperfield，old boy！’he said kindly．‘I'm glad to see you too．What are you doing here？’
　　‘I've just finished school，and my aunt has sent me to Lon don to look around before deciding on a profession．What about you，Steerforth？’
　　‘Well，I'm studying at Oxford University，but nothing ex citing ever happens there！That's why I'm in London for a few days．But it's boring here too，isn't it？’
　　‘In London？’I asked，surprised．‘I think it's wonderful！There's so much to do and see！I've just been to the theatre—the actors were excellent and—’
　　‘David，David！’laughed Steerforth．‘It does me good to see your fresh，innocent face，so full of excitement！Now，let me see，which room are staying in？’
　　‘Number 44．It's rather high up，’I confessed，blushing．
　　‘They've put you in number 44？I'll soon change that．’And when Steerforth complained to the manager，I was imme diately given a large，airy，comfortable room on the first floor，next to his．That night as I fell asleep I thought happily of the next few days，which Steerforth and I were planning to spend together．
　　A week passed very quickly，with visits to the theatre，the museums and the zoo．We went sightseeing，riding，swimming and boating．Steerforth was the perfect companion to have，and I admired him even more than before．In fact，I loved him with all my heart．
　　One day I said to him，‘You know，Steerforth，I really must go and visit my mother's old servant， Peggotty．She was very good to me when I was a child．’
　　‘Yes，David，I remember you told me．She lives in Yarmouth now， doesn't she？Why don't we go there together？’
　　‘Oh yes，Steerforth！You'd enjoy meeting her brothef，and all the family！They're very kind，good people．’
　　‘Even if they are only working people，’said Steerforth．I looked quickly at him to see what he meant，but he was smiling at me，so I knew he was joking，and I smiled too．
　　We travelled to Yarmouth by coach，and when we arrived，Steerforth stayed at the hotel while I went to Barkis's house to find Peggotty．When I knocked at the door，Peggotty opened it，and did not recognize me for a moment．I had continued to write to her regularly，but we had not seen each other for seven years，and I was no longer the small boy she remembered．But when she realized I was her Master David，she sobbed and sobbed with delight，holding me in her arms as she had always done．Soon she was calmer，and we talked about the events of the last few years．I heard that she was very happy with Mr Barkis，who；however，was ill in bed at the time．She was so pleased to see me that she insisted I should sleep at her house during my stay in Yarmouth，in the little bedroom she had al ways kept for me．
　　The next day I took Steerforth with me to visit Daniel Peg gotty．It was a dark and windy winter evening．As we came closer to the old boat，we heard happy voices and laughter in side．I opened the door，and suddenly I was surrounded by Daniel，Ham and Emily，all looking very surprised．
　　‘Look！It's Master David！Look how he's grown！’
　　And for a moment we were all shaking hands and talking and laughing at the same time．I did not forget to introduce Steerforth．They welcomed him warmly as my best friend．
　　‘Well！’cried Daniel Peggotty，his large face red and shin ing with delight．‘It's wonderful，Master David，that you two gentlemen have come here tonight of all nights！The best night of my life！Because tonight，gentlemen，my little Emily—’and he took Emily's small white hand in his rough red one and placed it on his heart—‘has agreed to become Ham's wife！’
　　‘I congratulate you with all my heart，’said Steerforth politely to Ham，without taking his eyes off Emily，who was blushing prettily．
　　‘Master David knows how I love this girl，’continued old Daniel，‘and my dearest wish was for her to have a good husband to take care of her． And there's no one I trust more than Ham！He's only a rough sailor like me，but he's honest，and sincere，and I know she'll come to no harm while he lives！’
　　Meanwhile，Ham was blushing too．I did not know what to say，unsure whether I still loved Emily and was therefore jealous of Ham，or whether I was glad they were going to be happy together．But steerforth always knew the right thing to say，and with a few well-chosen words he made us all feel much more comfortable．
　　We spent the rest of the evening very pleasantly，telling stories and singing songs，and it was midnight when Steerforth and I left the old boat．
　　‘Well！’said Steerforth to me as we walked across the sand in the cold night air．‘What a lovely girl！And what a coarse young man she's engaged to！’
　　I was shocked by these unexpectedly cold words．But when I turned to him and saw him smiling，I replied warmly，‘Ah，Steerforth！You pretend to laugh at people who are poorer or less educated than yourself，but I've just seen you spend the whole evening with the Peggotty family，making them happy！I know you understand and love them，and I admire you all the more for it！’
　　He stopped and looked at me，saying rather sadly，‘David，you're serious，aren't you？I wish I were as good as you！’
　　For the next two weeks I was often with Peggotty and Barkis，while Steerforth went sailing or fishing with Daniel and Ham，or found other things to do，so I did not see very much of him．Finally we decided to return to London．
　　While we were travelling back on the coach，I turned to say something，and was surprised to see how miserable he looked．
　　‘Oh，David！’he said unhappily．‘I wish I could control myself better！I hate myself sometimes！’
　　‘Steerforth！What can you mean！’I cried．‘You're the best，the most intelligent，the kindest of men！’
　　‘Thank you，David，’he said，shaking his head，‘but you don't know how bad I am．’
　　‘Bad！’I repeated．‘My dear Steerforth！Don't say that！I know your character well，and I'm proud to call you my friend！’
　　In a little while his mood changed，and he became cheerful again．I soon forgot his words，but I remembered them later．
　　In London I discovered that my aunt had arrived at the Colden Cross Hotel，and had booked a room there for several days．We were delighted to see each other，and had a long conversation that evening．She had come to ask me a particular question．
　　‘David，’she said very seriously，‘I've been thinking about your future profession．How would you feel about becoming a lawyer？’
　　I thought for a moment．‘Well，aunt，it sounds a very good idea．I confess I hadn't considered it before，but I think I'd like it．’
　　‘Very good，’said my aunt，jumping up．‘In that case，let's go immediately to see Mr Spenlow．He's a partner in an important law firm，and I think he'll agree to train you．We'll have to pay him，of course，but after several years you'll be a properly trained lawyer，and be able to earn your own money．’
　　And so we carried out this plan．My aunt paid Mr Spenlow's firm a thousand pounds，and I promised to work hard and do my best to become a successful lawyer．Before she returned to Dover，my aunt rented a small flat for me，at the top of a house near the lawcourts，and I moved in at once．
　　At first it seemed very exciting to walk through the busy streets after a long day in the courts or at Mr Spenlow's dusty office，and know that I had my own home to return to．But when I had climbed up all the stairs，and entered my sitting room，it no longer seemed so exciting．In fact，my flat looked empty and depressing．So，after two days of loneliness，I was very glad to receive my first visitor，Steerforth，and because I was so happy to see him，I invited him and two friends of his to dinner the next evening．
　　As it was my first dinner party，I did not know what to buy，but I ordered cooked dishes of chicken and fish from the restaurant，bought cheese and fruit from the market，and had a large number of bottles of wine delivered．I was quite fright ened by how much money I had spent，but when Steerforth and his friends arrived，I soon became more cheerful．The party was a great success，and we all enjoyed ourselves very much．We ate，and drank，and smoked，and drank again．I was constantly opening bottles of wine，and became unusually talkative．I began to feel rather strange，and when I caught sight of myself in a mirror，I seemed very pale．I had to confess to myself that I looked drunk．
　　Someone suggested going to the theatre，and in a kind of mist we left my flat and walked through the streets．Steerforth was holding my arm and laughing．Then a man in a little box looked out of the fog，and took money from somebody．Soon we were sitting high up in a very hot，very crowded theatre．There were bright lights，and there was music，but I could not understand what anyone was saying，and the whole building seemed to swim in front of my eyes．
　　Then someone suggested going to visit some friends in an other part of the theatre，so we went downstairs．Suddenly I saw，quite clearly，Agnes Wickfield，sitting with a lady and gentleman．She was looking at me with a surprised expression on her face．
　　‘Good heavens！’I cried．‘Agnes！You're in London！’
　　‘Quiet！’she whispered．‘People are trying to listen to the actors．You'll disturb them！’Then she added kindly，‘David，please do what I say．Ask your friends to take you home．’
　　I had always taken Agnes's advice，and I did so this time．I do not remember how I got home，but I do remember Steer forth helping me to undress and get into bed．What a terrible，sleepless night I spent！How ill I felt！How dry my mouth was！But the next morning I felt even worse．I was so miser able and ashamed that I had been so stupid，and that Agnes had seen me drunk．I could not even apologize to her，because I did not know where she was staying in London．I spent the whole day with my head in my hands，in my dirty，smoky room，surrounded by empty wine bottles．
　　But the next day a note was delivered to my flat．It was from Agnes，asking me to visit her at the house where she was staying．I went straight there after my day's work at the office．
　　She looked so quiet and good，and reminded me so much of my happy schooldays in Canterbury，that I could not help crying．
　　‘I'm so sorry，Agnes，’I said，‘that you saw me like that．I wish I were dead！’
　　‘David，don't be unhappy，’she said cheerfully．‘You know you can trust me，and I'll always be your friend．’
　　I took her hand and kissed it．‘Agnes，you're my good angel！’
　　She shook her head．‘No，David，but if I were，I'd warn you—to stay away from your bad angel．’
　　‘My dear Agnes！’I cried．‘Do you mean Steerforth？’
　　‘I do，David，’she replied，looking firmly at me．
　　‘Agnes，you're wrong！He is my trusted friend！He helps and guides me！It wasn't his fault that I got drunk，you know！’
　　‘I wasn't thinking of that．I judge him from what you've told me about him，and your character，and his influence over you．’Agnes spoke very seriously，and her words went straight to my heart．‘I'm certain I'm right．You've made a dangerous friend，David，because you're so trusting．Please remember what I say—and forgive me for saying it．’
　　‘I will，if you forgive me for getting drunk．’
　　Agnes agreed，smiling，and then said suddenly，‘Have you seen Uriah Heep？’
　　‘No，’I replied．‘Is he in London？What's he doing here？’
　　‘I'm worried，David，’answered Agnes with sadness in her beautiful eyes．‘I think he's going to be Father's partner．’
　　I remembered Uriah Heep's oily smile，and how uncomfort able he always used to make me feel．
　　‘What？That creature？He's so unpleasant！You must pre vent your father from agreeing to it，Agnes！’
　　Agnes smiled miserably．‘My poor father has no choice．You know how unhappy he has often been？And of course you've seen him drinking．You see，he loved my mother very much，and when she died，he didn't care so much about his work．That's when he started drinking．Uriah's very clever—he knows all this，and he's been very useful to Father，doing all the work that Father had forgotten or didn't want to do．Father really needs Uriah now，to keep his business going．And Uriah himself pretends to be humble and grateful，but in fact he's in a strong position，and is insisting on becoming a partner．Father is ashamed of himself，but he has to agree．Poor Father！I'd do anything to help him，any thing！’And Agnes sobbed bitterly．
　　I had never seen Agnes cry before．It made me so sad that I could only say helplessly，‘My dear Agnes！Please don't cry！’However，in a few minutes she was calm again，and I was able to leave her，promising to visit her and her father in Canter bury very soon．






■ 6 David falls in love
　　A gnes had asked me to be polite to Uriah if I met him，and so，when I saw him the next day near the law courts，I was careful not to offend him．He looked even stranger than before，with his small evil head and long thin body，and his wide oily smile．When we shook hands，I no ticed how cold and wet his hand felt，just like a fish．
　　‘Would you—would you like to come to my rooms for coffee，Uriah？’I offered，trying to hide my horror of him．
　　‘Oh，Master Copperfield，I mean，Mister Copperfield，I should say now！How kind of you！I'm too humble to expect such kindness！But I would like that！’
　　And when we reached my flat，he looked at me with an unpleasantly confident smile，and said，‘Perhaps you've heard that I'm going to become Mr Wickfield's partner，Mr Cop perfield？’
　　‘Yes，’I replied．‘Agnes has told me about it．’
　　‘Ah！I'm glad to hear that Miss Agnes knows about it，’he answered．‘Thank you for that，Mr Copperfield！’
　　I was annoyed with myself for mentioning Agnes's name，and hated hearing him say it，but I said nothing and drank my coffee．
　　‘You said once，Mr Copperfield，’continued Uriah，rubbing his hands together happily，‘that perhaps I'd be Mr Wickfield's partner one day．It was kind of you to say so．A humble person like me remembers things like that！And now it's true！I'm glad to think I've been able to help poor Mr Wickfield．Oh，how very careless he has been！If I hadn't been his assistant，he would certainly have lost his business，his house，and all his money by now．Of course，I'm helping him because I admire him—and not only him…’
　　Suddenly，although the room was warm，an icy coldness spread through my body，as I stared into his cruel little face．
　　‘Miss Agnes is looking beautiful at the moment，isn't she？’he went on，smiling horribly．‘Mr Copperfield，I trust you，because as you know，I've always liked you，although I'm so humble，and you're a gentleman．So I'd like to tell you my little secret．In spite of my low position，I love Miss Agnes！I've given my heart to her，and I hope to marry her one day！’
　　There was a purple mist in front of my eyes．I wanted to hit his ugly face，or stab a knife right into his wicked heart．I was almost mad with anger．But I thought of Agnes's request，and I managed to control myself．
　　‘Have—have you spoken to Agnes about your—your love？’I asked as calmly as I could．
　　‘Oh no，Mr Copperfield．I'm waiting for the right moment．Perhaps I'll ask her when I become her father's partner．She'll think kindly of me，you see，when she realizes how much her father needs me．She loves him so much！Ah，what a good daughter my Agnes is！And what an excellent wife she'll be to me！’
　　Dear，sweet Agnes，my adopted sister！I did not know any man good enough to be her husband．Could she ever marry this worthless insect？When Uriah left my flat，I spent a sleepless night worrying about what I should do．In the end I decided to say nothing to Agnes about Uriah's plan，as she already had enough to worry about．
　　A year had passed since I first started work in Mr Spenlow's firm．I often went to court with him，and began to understand the details of some of the most difficult cases．Mr Spenlow was kind to me，and occasionally talked to me，not only about law but also about other matters．I discovered that his wife had died，and that he lived in a large country house just outside London，with his only daughter and her paid companion．One day he invited me to his house for the weekend，and I accepted gratefully．So on Friday evening Mr Spenlow's coach and horses drove us to the house．
　　When I saw the Spenlows’home，I realized how rich Mr Spenlow must be．It was a lovely old building，with large gar dens．As soon as we entered，Mr Spenlow asked one of the servants，‘Where's Miss Dora？’
　　‘Dora！’I thought．‘What a beautiful name！’We went in to the sitting－room，and I suppose Mr Spenlow introduced me．I did not notice，because nothing mattered at that moment．I just stared stupidly at his daughter Dora，lost in wonder at her beauty，and unable to say anything．I had fallen in love in a second．
　　As I stared，I heard a voice speaking to me， but it was not Dora's．It was her companion，whom I had not noticed at all while Mr Spenlow was making the introductions．When I saw that the companion was Miss Murdstone，I was surprised，certainly，but nothing could take my attention away from Dora for more than a second or two．
　　Mr Spenlow explained that Miss Murdstone had been kind enough to come and look after his poor motherless daughter，and to be her confidential friend and companion．But it seemed to me that Dora was neither friendly nor confidential towards her stern companion．
　　As for me，the rest of the weekend passed in a kind of fog．We ate meals，and went for walks．People spoke to me，and I answered．But I have no idea what I actually said．All I re－member was Dora's golden hair，and Dora's blushing face，and Dora's beautiful blue eyes！Occasionally I was lucky enough to speak to her alone，and then I was so shy that I blushed as much as Dora herself．I was very jealous of the little dog that she carried everywhere with her．Sometimes I thought she liked me a little，and at other times I was sure she would never love me．I was wildly，desperately in love！
　　I had wondered if Miss Murdstone would try and blacken my name with the Spenlows，but on that first evening she had taken me to one side．
　　‘David Copperfield，’ she said coldly．‘I see no need for either of us to speak about the past to anyone here．I imagine we are agreed on that．’
　　‘Certainly，ma’am．We are agreed on that，although I shall never change my opinion of you．’
　　I put Miss Murdstone out of my mind，and for several weeks after meeting Dora，I lived in a dream．I did my work automatically，and I never stopped thinking of her．The greatest happiness I could imagine was being engaged to Dora．I dared not hope that one day we would be married．
　　While walking round London one day，hoping to meet Dora out shopping，I met my old schoolfriend Tommy Traddles． He was living in the city，like me，and was also studying to become a lawyer．I arranged to visit him，and went to his house after work the next day．He lived in one room in a rented house，in a very poor part of the city．His room was small，and almost empty．
　　‘Copperfield！I'm glad to see you！he said warmly．‘you can see I haven't got much furniture，but I'm hoping to earn more money later，when I've finished my studies．’
　　‘Didn't you have a rich uncle，Traddles？’I asked．
　　‘Yes，but I've always been unlucky，you know．He decided he didn't like me，so he didn't leave me anything when he died． I'm really very poor，and I have to do several jobs to pay for my studies．’Traddles looked surprisingly cheerful．‘But I must tell you，Copperfield，as you're an old friend，that I'm engaged！To a lovely girl，who comes from a large family，and lives in Devon！’
　　I was thinking of Dora as I shook hands with him and congratulated him enthusiastically．‘Will you get married soon？’I asked．
　　‘No，she's very poor too，so we'll have to wait a long time，until we've saved enough money．She's such a dear girl，Copperfield．She says she'll wait for me until she's sixty，if necessary！And I'm quite happy here with the people who rent the house—the Micawbers are very kind．’
　　‘Who did you say？’I cried．‘The Micawbers！I know them！’
　　Just then Mr Micawber himself knocked at the door and entered．His stomach was a little fatter and his face a little older than before，but he looked as confident as ever．I went up to him and shook his hand．
　　‘How are you，Mr Micawber？’I asked．‘Do you remember me？’
　　‘Is it possible？ Can it be？ Have I the pleasure of seeing my old friend Copperfield again？’ he replied， a smile spreading over his large face．He turned to call downstairs，‘My dear！Come and meet this gentleman， my love！’
　　When Mrs Micawber came in，she was also delighted to see me，and we talked for some time about the twins， and the other children，and her husband's business interests．But this conversation soon made Mr Micawber rather depressed．
　　‘You see，Copperfield，’he said miserably，‘nothing has turned up yet．Sometimes I wonder whether anything ever will turn up．I can't pay for our food，or even our water．It's hard enough for me to accept the situation，but how can I expect my dear wife to live like this？Perhaps it would have been better if I had never asked her to marry me！’He put his head in his hands．
　　‘Micawber！’cried his wife．‘How can you say that！You know I have always loved and admired you，and always will love and admire you！My dear husband！’And they fell into each other's arms，sobbing on each other's shoulders．In a few moments they had both dried their eyes and looked quite cheerful again．I realized that the Micawbers had not changed at all，but this quick change of mood was rather a surprise for Traddles．
　　Before I left， I made sure I had a word in private with my old schoolfriend．‘Traddles，’I whispered，‘take my advice—don't lend Mr Micawber any money．He's got a lot of debts．’
　　Traddles looked uncomfortable．‘Thank you，Copperfield，’he whispered in reply，‘but I've already lent him some．I don't know whether he'll give it back—you know how unlucky I am！’
　　When I got back to my rooms，I found Steer forth waiting for me there．I thought of Agnes's warning about him，but when I saw his open， good－looking face，I could not believe he could be a bad influence on anyone．However，there was something rather strange in his manner that night．Sometimes he seemed quite depressed，almost desperate， but a minute later he was laughing wildly，and I had no idea why he was like that．
　　‘I've just been to Yarmouth，David！’he told me．
　　‘Oh！’I replied．‘You've seen the Peggotty family，I expect？’
　　‘I haven't seen much of them，but I have got some news for you．It's about old Barkis．I'm afraid his illness has got much worse，and the doctor thinks he'll die very soon．’
　　‘Oh dear！’I said．‘Poor Peggotty will be so sad！’
　　‘Yes，it's bad luck，’replied Steerforth carelessly．‘But people die in this world every minute．I'm not afraid of death！I want to live life in my own way，and nobody can stop me！’He threw his head back proudly．I looked into his handsome face，wondering why he was so excited，which was unusual for him．
　　‘Steerforth，I think I'll have to go to Yarmouth myself，’I said．‘Perhaps I can help Peggotty at this difficult time．’
　　Smiling，he put his hands on my shoulders．‘I wish I could be as good as you！David，promise me that if anything ever happens to separate us，you'll think of me at my best！Promise me that！’
　　‘Steerforth，you have no best or worst for me，’I answered．‘You will always have your place in my heart！’
　　And as he turned to go，he gave me his hand， and smiled in his old friendly way．That is how I like to remember him，now that I shall never touch his hand again，or see him smile．
　　When I arrived in Yarmouth，I went straight to Barkis's house．In the sitting－room I found Daniel，Ham and Emily．Ham was standing by the door，while Emily was sobbing in Daniel's arms．None of them seemed surprised to see me．
　　‘Emily's very young，Master David，’explained Daniel．‘It's hard for her to accept death．That's why she's crying．Now cheer up，Emily my dear，Ham has come to take you home．what's that？’He bent his grey head down to hear her whispered reply．‘You want to stay here with your old uncle？But you should go with Ham—he'll be your husband soon！’
　　‘That's all right，’said Ham．‘If it makes Emily happy，it'll make me happy． I'll go home alone．’He went over to Emily and gave her a gentle kiss．She seemed to turn away from him a little．As Ham went out，I went upstairs to see poor Barkis．
　　He was lying unconscious in bed，looking very pale and ill．Peggotty was sitting beside him．She jumped up and took me delightedly in her arms，just as she used to do．Then she turned to her husband．‘Barkis，my dear，’she said almost cheerfully，‘ here's Master David，who brought us together，you remember？He carried your messages for you． Can you speak to him？’
　　Barkis lay silently there，not moving．We sat beside him all through that long night．In the early morning， he suddenly opened his eyes，reached out his hand to me，and said clearly，With a pleasant smile，‘Barkis is willing！’And then he closed his eyes，and died．
　　‘He was a good man！’said Peggotty，with tears in her eyes．‘I shall miss him！’
　　I was able to help Peggotty with the arrangements for the funeral．Barkis was buried in Blunderstone churchyard，close to my mother and little brother．We discovered that Barkis had saved quite a lot of money，which he left to Peggotty and Daniel．So I knew that Peggotty would not need to work in future．
　　On the day before the funeral，we all arranged to meet at the old boat．It was my last evening in Yarmouth，as I was re－turning to London the following day．When I arrived，I was surprised to see that Ham and Emily were not there．Peggotty was feeling more cheerful now，and Daniel was talking to her．Just then Ham came to the door．
　　‘Master David，come outside a minute，would you？’ he asked．I stepped outside，and Ham shut the door carefully．It was raining heavily，and as we stood on the lonely beach，I noticed how very pale Ham's face was．
　　‘Ham！’I cried．‘What's the matter？’
　　‘Master David！’he sobbed wildly．I had never seen such a strong man cry like that before．‘It's Emily！I'd have died for her！I love her with all my heart！But she's run away and—worse than that！Oh，how I wish God had saved her from this ruin！’
　　I shall never fonget his desperate face turned towards me，and the pain in his honest eyes．
　　‘You're educated，Master David！’he continued．‘You know how to express yourself！Help me！How can I ever ex－plain to him in there？He loves her even more than I do！’
　　I saw the door open，and tried to stop Ham speaking，but it was too late．Daniel Peggotty came out，and when he saw us，he seemed to realize immediately what we were talking about．The expression on his face changed in a moment，and he pulled us both back inside．I found myself with a letter in my hand which Ham had given me．
　　‘Read it，sir，’said Daniek，his face pale and trembling and his eyes wild．‘Read it slowly，please．’
　　The room was completely silent as I read aloud：
　　Dear Ham，
　　Please， please， forgive me for running away and leaving you．When you see this，I'll be far away．I shall never return to my dear home unless he marries me and brings me back as a lady．Oh，I'm so sorry，and so ashamed！I know this will break your heart，but believe me，I'm not good enough for you！I'm too wicked．Tell Uncle I'll always love him，even if he can never love me again．And I'll always think of you，dear Ham，even if you hate me for what I've done．Forgive me，and goodbye！
　　Emily
　　Daniel did not move for a long time after I had finished reading．I took his hand，but he did not notice．Suddenly he appeared to wake up，and said in a low voice，
　　‘Who's the man？I want to know his name．’
　　Ham looked quickly at me，and I felt a shock run through my whole body．I fell on to a chair and could not speak．
　　‘Don't listen，Master David，’Ham said，hesitating，‘we don't blame you for it．’Peggotty put her arm round my neck，but I could not move．‘A—gentleman's been here very often recently，’continued Ham in a broken voice，‘and—to－day people saw Emily driving off with him in his coach！’
　　‘Tell me！’cried Daniel wildly．‘Is his name Steerforth？’
　　‘It is！’replied Ham just as wildly，‘and I'm sorry，Master David，but he's the wickedest man I've ever known！’
　　After a moment Daniel spoke．He looked suddenly much older．‘I wish I'd drowned him when I had the chance！But it's too late now．There's no peace for me here while my dear girl is away．I'm going to look for her，and bring her back home．Don't any of you try to stop me！Ham，you must stay here in Yarmouth．Keep a light always burning in the window of this house，so that if the poor girl ever comes back，she can find her way home across the sand．I'm going to London，and France，and all over the world if necessary．I'm prepared to spend my whole life travelling until I find her．If anything happens to me，if I don't come back，tell her I forgive her—tell her my love for her is unchanged！’
　　And although we all tried hard to persuade him to stay，he refused to listen．He took his coat，hat，bag and stick，and stepped out into the darkness．We watched him walking along the London road，until he disappeared from sight．I often thought of that lonely figure in the next few weeks and months，walking through strange streets in foreign cities，looking for his adopted child．When I thought of him，I remembered his last words to us：If anything happens to me，if I don't come back，tell her forgive her—tell her my love for her is unchanged！






■ 7 Good news and bad news for David
　　All this time I had gone on loving Dora more than ever．
　　The more evil there seemed to be in the world，the more brightly Dora's star shone down on me．I am sure I considered her a beautiful angel，far above the rest of us poor humans，and I had no real hope of persuading her to love me．
　　Peggotty had come to London with me，as she was feeling rather lonely after Barkis's death and Daniel's departure，and I could not stop myself telling her all about Dora．She was very interested，and most encouraging．
　　‘The young lady should be very proud to have such a hand－some，intelligent young man as you，Master Davie！’she cried．‘And I'm sure her father will be delighted to accept you as her husband！’But I could not share her hopeful view of the sitution．
　　However，a wonderful thing happened．During a long conversation with Mr Spenlow in the office，he mentioned that it was Dora's birthday the following week，and invited me to a picnic to celebrate it．As soon as I heard this，I went completely mad，and could not think at all clearly．In the next week I bought expensive new clothes and boots，and arranged to hire a handsome white horse．On the day of the picnic， I got up at six in the morning and went to Govent Garden market to buy the freshest and most beautiful flowers for Dora，and by ten o’clock I was riding towards the Spenlows’house．
　　How lovely Dora looked，in her sky－blue dress and white hat，when I met her in the garden in front of the house！And when she accepted my flowers with delight，I almost thought I would die of happiness．
　　‘You'll be glad to hear，Mr Copperfield，’she said，smiling prettily，‘that cross Miss Murdstone isn't here．She'll be away for at least three weeks．Instead I have my dear friend，Miss Julia Mills，here with me．’
　　Sitting next to Dora was a young lady I had not noticed be－fore．Although she was only about twenty，she looked very calm and wise．I later discovered that she had had an unhappy experience in love，and had decided never again to become personally involved in matters of the heart．
　　‘How delightful for you！’I answered，blushing as I always did when I spoke to Dora．‘And everything that is delightful to you is delightful to me，Miss Spenlow！’Miss Mills said nothing，but smiled kindly on us both．
　　To get to the picnic place，which was some way from the house，Mr Spenlow，Dora and Miss Mills drove in an open carriage，while I rode by their side on my handsome white horse．I shall never have such a ride again．Dora sat with her back to the horses，looking towards me，and holding my flowers close to her sweet face．Our eyes often met，and I am surprised I did not fall off my horse．I did not notice the dust，or the road we were taking，Sometimes Mr Spenlow spoke to me about the scenery，and I replied politely，but I cannot remember what I said．All I could see was Dora．
　　I was very disappointed when we arrived，to find that other guests had been invited．I wat quite jealous even of the ladies，because they talked to Dora and took her away from me，but I hated all the men as soon as I saw them．There was a very unpleasant，talkative man with a red moustache，who insisted he knew all about preparing food，and soon had most of the young ladies round him．One of them was Dora．I felt that he was now my worst enemy．
　　When we started eating，I saw to my horror that Red Moustache was sitting，with a huge plate of chicken，at Dora's feet！I could not think clearly，but I pretended to be cheerful．I sat with a young lady dressed in pink，and talked amusingly to her，and looked at her，and fetched her whatever she needed．Sometimes I looked over at Dora，and she looked back at me，but she had Red Moustache and I had the young lady in pink．
　　After the meal，the young lady's mother took her away，and I walked alone into a wood，feeling angry and desperate．I was just planning to ride away on my handsome white horse，although I did not know where to，when I saw Dora and Miss Mills coming to meet me．
　　‘Mr Copperfield，’said Miss Mills，‘You are unhappy．’
　　‘No，no，Miss Mills！’I protested firmly．‘Perfectly happy！’
　　‘And Dora，’continued Miss Mills，‘you are unhappy．’
　　‘Oh good heavens，no，Julia！’cried Dora．‘Not at all！’
　　‘Mr Copperfield and Dora，’said Miss Mills，looking old and wise，‘enough of this foolishness！You love each other！Confess it and be happy！Take the chance that life offers you！Listen to one who speaks from bitter experience！’
　　I was so hot and excited that I took Dora's little hand immediately and kissed it—and she let me！I kissed Miss Mills's hand too，and life seemed wonderful again．
　　Dora shyly put her arm in mine and we walked about together，until，much too soon，we heard the other guests calling her name．So we had to go back，and when they wanted Dora to sing a song，Red Moustache offered to fetch the guitar from the carriage for her．But Dora told him nobody except me knew where it was．
　　So I fetched the guitar，and I held her gloves，and I sat beside her while she sang．And I knew that in that great crowd of people she was singing only for me，who loved her．
　　When the guests left，I rode beside the carriage all the way back to the Spenlows’house．Mr Spenlow，who had drunk a lot of wine，was asleep in his seat，and Miss Mills was smiling in a motherly way，as Dora and I whispered happily to each other．Once Miss Mills called me to her side of the carriage．
　　‘Dora is coming to stay with me，’she told me quietly，‘ the day after tomorrow．Perhaps you would like to visit us？’
　　‘Miss Mills！How can I ever thank you？’I said．‘What a friend you are—to Miss Spenlow and me！’
　　When we arrived at the Spenlows ’house，I had to say goodbye to Dora and ride back to London．On the way，I remembered everything she had done or said ten thousand times．I decided I had to tell her I loved her as soon as possible，and ask whether she loved me too．It was the most important question in the world，and only Dora could give me the answer to it．
　　So，two days later，I dressed in my finest clothes and went to the address Miss Mills had given me．The servant took me to the sittingroom，where I found Julia Mills learning a song，and Dora painting the flowers I had given her！After a short conversation Miss Mills made an excuse and left the room，and Dora and I were alone together．
　　‘I hope your poor horse wasn't tired the other night，’said Dora，raising her beautiful eyes to mine．‘It was a long way for him，to and from the picnic place．’
　　I must ask her today！I thought．My whole body was trembling．‘It was a long way for him，’I answered．‘For me it seemed very short，because of my happiness in being so near you．’
　　There was a moment's silence．Then Dora said，‘You didn't seem to care for that happiness earlier in the day，when you were sitting with the lady in pink．But I expect you don't mean what you say．And of course you're quite free to do whatever you like！’
　　I don't know how I did it．It happened so quickly．Suddenly I had Dora in my arms and I couldn't stop speaking．I told her how I loved her．I told her I would die without her．And when she blushed and cried a little，I said I had loved her day and night since the moment I had first seen her．I told her that nobody had ever loved or could ever love as much as I loved her．
　　Somehow I found myself sitting quietly next to Dora on the sofa，holding her little hand．We were engaged！I suppose we realized that one day we would get married，but for the moment we were going to keep our engagement secret from Mr Spenlow．When Miss Mills came in，she was delighted to hear our news，and promised to help us as much as possible．
　　Now began one of the happiest times of my life．When I look back，I see how foolish I was，but how loving and sincere！I visited Dora every day，and I did not have time for anyone or anything else．But in the middle of my excitement I suddenly thought of Agnes，of her clear calm eyes and her gentle face，and I sat down immediately to write to her，and tell her all about Dora．I knew that as my adopted sister she would share my happiness，and I wanted her approval．
　　One day when Peggotty and I were having tea in my flat，Tommy Traddles came to visit me．‘My dear Copperfield！’he cried．‘I've been several times before，but you've been out．’
　　‘My dear Traddles，’I replied，‘yes，I'm very sorry， I've been visiting my—Miss，D，you know．’
　　‘I expect she lives in London，doesn't she？Mine—that's Sopby—beautiful name，isn't it？Mine lives in Devon，I think I told you．So I don't see her very often．She really is the dearest girl！She's very busy at home，you know，looking after the other nine children．And her mother，who's unable to walk．’
　　‘What a wonderful girl she must be！’I agreed politely．‘And tell me，Traddles，how is Mr Micawber？’
　　‘I'm not living in his house at the moment，’said Traddles，‘because his creditors demanded payment of his debts recently，and he had to move to another house．To avoid these unpleasant men，he's even changed his name to Mortimer，and he only comes out of the house after dark，wearing glasses．’
　　‘So nothing has turned up for him yet？And what abut the money you lent him，Traddles？’
　　‘I'm afraid I may not get it back．But Mr Micawber promises to give it back one day．He's a fine，honest man，isn't he？’And Traddles looked hopefully at me．
　　Before I could reply，we heard footsteps on the stairs．I was very surprised to see my aunt coming upstairs．She was carrying two cases and her cat，and was followed closely by Mr Dick，carrying two more cases．
　　‘My dear aunt！’I cried．‘What an unexpected pleasure！’We kissed each other，and I shook hands with Mr Dick．Traddles left quietly，as he could see we would be discussing family matters．Peggotty made some more tea for my aunt，who had sat down heavily on her cases．
　　‘Dear aunt！’I said．‘Make yourself more comfortable！Sit in an armchair，or sit on the sofa！’
　　‘Why do you think I'm sitting on my cases？she asked，looking seriously at me．
　　I shook my head，unable to guess．
　　‘Because what I'm sitting on is all I have！Because I've lost all my money，my dear！’
　　I couldn't have been more shocked if the house and all of us in it had fallen into the River Thames．
　　‘Yes，’continued my aunt，putting her head calmly on my shoulder．‘I'll tell you all about it tomorrow，David，but tonight we must find a bed for Mr Dick，and I'll sleep here，to save money．’So that night，my aunt agreed to take my bed，while I planned to sleep on the sitting-room sofa，and I took Mr Dick to a neighbour's house to rent a room．When I returned，I found my aunt walking up and down in front of the sitting-room fire．
　　‘That Peggotty woman is very fond of you，David！’ she said．‘ She's been offering to give us some of her money—the money she inherited from her husband！Of course I refused at once．But she's a good woman．And she's been telling me about the trouble at Yarmouth—’
　　‘Yes，poor Emily！’I could not stop myself saying．
　　‘Silly Emily，you mean！But I'm sorry for you，because you cared for her once．And now Peggotty tells me you're in love again！’
　　I blushed．‘I love Dora with all my heart，aunt！’
　　‘I suppose the little thing is very lovely，is she？’
　　‘No one can imagine how lovely she is！’
　　‘She isn't at all silly，is she？’asked my aunt．
　　I had never considered this possibility before，and could only repeat what my aunt had said．‘Silly， aunt？’
　　‘Well，well，I only ask，’replied my aunt gently．‘David，you're very loving，like your poor mother，and you need a good，serious，sensible person to love．’
　　‘Aunt，if you only knew how sensible Dora is！’I replied．
　　‘Oh David！’she answered．‘Blind，blind，blind！’
　　This made me feel a little uncomfortable，but I was glad she knew my secret．I thought perhaps she was rather tiredt，so I said goodnight．She went to my bedroom，and I lay down on the sofa．
　　How miserable I was that night！I knew I should be thinking of my poor aunt's situation，but I could not prevent myself from thinking of Dora．How could I marry her if I had no money，no expensive clothes to wear，no handsome white horse to ride or flowers to give her？
　　The next morning I got up early to have a walk in the fresh air，and on the way home，a carriage stopped beside me，and Agnes Wickfield got out．I immediately felt better when I saw her beautiful calm face smiling at me．She had heard that my aunt was in trouble，and had come to London to see her．We walked together to my flat．
　　‘You know that Uriah Heep is my father's partner now？'she said quietly．‘His influence over my father is far too great．Father is much，much worse．He looks years older，and I'm afraid that，encouraged by Uriah，he drinks more than ever．Uriah and his old mother live with us now，so I can't always be with Father—to—to protect him from whatever Uriah is planning．I just hope that love and truth will always be stronger than evil！’
　　I could not give her my opinion of Uriah，because by then we had arrived at the flat．My aunt was very pleased to see Agnes again，and made us sit down on the sofa next to Peggotty．
　　‘Now let me explain to you all what happened to my money，’said my aunt firmly．I was surprised to see that Agnes was pale and trembling．Betsey Trotwood continued，‘I saved a lot of money over the years，and my lawyer，Mr Wickfield，used to help me invest it in the right companies．But recently I thought he wasn't such a good lawyer as he used to be，so I decided to invest my money myself．What a lot of mistakes I made！Who knows where it's gone？In gold，and foreign banks，and so on．It's no good worrying about it，but I can tell you，there's nothing left．’
　　The colour was beginning to return to Agnes's face．‘So it—it wasn't my father's fault，dear Miss Trotwood？’
　　‘Not at all，Agnes，’said my aunt cheerfully．‘Now can any of you give me some advice？I've asked my servant Janet to rent my little house in Kent．That will bring in about seventy pounds a year．I think we'll need more than that，to live on．’
　　‘You and David could share this flat very cheaply，with Mr Dick just round the corner in his rented room，’suggested Agnes．‘And I think I can find a little job for David．Do you remember Dr Strong，the headmaster of the Canterbury school？Now that he's retired and come to live in London，he needs a private secretary to work for him in the mornings and evenings，at his house．He was asking Father about it the other day．What do you think？’
　　‘Agnes！I cried．‘What would we do without you？ You are my good angel，I told you so before！I could easily be Dr Strong's secretary，as well as continuing my work in Mr Spenlow's firm．I'll go and see him today，and arrange it with him．’
　　Agnes gave me her beautiful smile as she got up to leave．I went downstairs with her，and as we walked together to the coach station，I saw an old beggar with a white stick in the street．He was holding out his thin hand for money，and crying，‘Blind！Blind！Blind！’It sounded like an echo of what my aunt had said the day before．Oh Agnes，dear sister！If I had only known then what I discovered long afterwards！






■ 8 David's new life
　　With Agnes's encouragement I felt much stronger，and no longer depressed．My life now bad a purpose．I intended to work as hard as I could，to help my aunt and to earn enough money to marry Dora．I got up every morning at five o’clock，walked to Dr Strong's house on the other side of London，worked with him for two hours every morning，and then walked back to Mr Spenlow's office，where I spent most of the day in the lawcourts．Then I returned to Dr Strong's for two or three more hours in the evening，and finally came home to my flat，where my aunt，Peggotty and Mr Dick would be waiting for me．I was glad to be able to tell my aunt that Dr Strong would pay me seventy pounds a year for my work．With that，and the rent from my aunt's house in Kent，we could live quite well，if we were careful．Because I was young and healthy，I did not mind hard work，and whenever I was tired，I told myself，‘You're doing it for Dora！’and that made me work even harder．
　　When I met Traddles one day near the courts，I told him about my new situation，and he was very sympathetic．
　　‘But I have news for you too，Copperfield！’he said．‘The Micawbers are moving to Canterbury．’
　　‘Oh！That means something must have turned up for them！’I replied，interested．
　　‘Yes，Mr Micawber is going to become assistant to someone called Uriah Heep，a partner in a firm of Canterbury lawyers．’
　　‘Heep！’I cried in horror．‘I know him！Why would Mr Micawber want to work for him？’
　　‘Well，I do know that Heep has paid all Mr Micawber's debts in London，’answered Traddles．‘The whole family is leaving tomorrow．They asked me to tell you．’
　　I wondered why Heep wanted Micawber to work for him，and I felt sure Uriah had some evil plan in his ugly head．
　　The next day Peggotty was returning to Yarmouth to look after Ham，while Daniel was away．After I had taken her to the coach station and said goodbye to her，I hurried to Miss Mills's house．I had not yet told Dora about the changes in my life，because I had not wanted to explain it all in a letter，but today she was visiting Julia Mills and was expecting me to come to tea．
　　How happy and heautiful Dora looked when she met me in the sitting-room！And how shocked and miserable she looked when I asked her immediately，‘Can you love a beggar，Dora？’My pretty little Dora！She had no idea what I meant．
　　‘Don't be silly，David！’she cried．‘What are you talking about？’
　　‘It's true，Dora，my love！’I cried．‘I've lost all my money！I'm a beggar！’And I looked so serious that Dora was frightened，and began to sob bitterly on my shoulder．
　　‘But I love you，Dora，and always will！’I continued．‘It doesn't matter if we are poor，because I'll work hard to buy our bread．We don't need much as long as we have each other！Tell me your heart is still mine，dear Dora！’
　　‘Oh yes！’she cried．‘Oh yes，it's all yours！Only，don't frighten me again！Don't talk of hard work and bread！I don't understand！I hardly ever eat bread！’
　　I loved her more than ever．But I felt she was not very practical．In a few moments，when she had stopped crying and was calmer，I tried again to make her understand．
　　‘My dearest！May I mention something？’
　　‘Oh，please don't be practical！begged Dora，tears coming to her lovely eyes．‘It frightens me so much！’
　　‘My dear one，if we work together，and share our problems，it will make us，and our love，stronger．
　　‘But I'm not strong at all！’she cried miserably．‘Ask Julia！She'll tell you—I'm weak，and foolish！’
　　‘But if you thought sometimes，my sweet Dora，that you are engaged to a poor man—if you tried to see how your father manages the servants，or how much food costs in the markets，it would be helpful to us．We must be brave，dear Dora！Our path in life is steep and rocky—’
　　I was becoming quite enthusiastic，but I suddenly realized I had said far too much．Poor little Dora was sobbing and screaming with fear，and in a moment was lying unconscious on the sofa．I really thought I had killed her．I threw water on her face and went down on my knees to ask her to forgive me．I called myself a selfish，heartless creature，and shouted for Julia Mills．At last she hurried in，and I explained what had happened．When Dora opened her eyes，her friend helped her upstairs．
　　While Dora was upstairs，washing her face and calming herself，I asked Miss Mills's advice on the best way to encourage Dora to become more practical．Miss Mills shook her head sadly．
　　‘I must be honest with you，Mr Copperfield．Our dearest Dora is a beautiful，innocent child of nature，full of light and happiness．She is above the things of this world，which we poor humans have to worry about．I think you'll just have to accept that fact．’
　　When Dora came downstairs again，she looked so lovely that I felt bitterly angry with myself for making her unhappy， even for a moment．We had tea，and she sang her French songs to me，and played the guitar．We were happy again，until the moment when I stupidly mentioned that I had to get up at five o’clock the next morning．Suddenly her pretty face looked sad，and she did not play or sing again．When I got up to go，she came up close to me，and said lovingly，‘You bad boy，don't be so silly！Don't get up at five o’clock！Why should you？’
　　‘But my love，I have work to do！I have to work in order to live！’ I replied． ‘ Work？Don't be so foolish， David dear！’and she seemed to think that was the end of the matter， as she gave me a kiss straight from her innocent little heart．
　　I loved her， and went on loving her． But I went on working hard too， and worrying about earning money． Some evenings，as I sat opposite my aunt in my little sitting-room at the end of another exhausting day， I was quite frightened， when I thought of the problems I was going to have to solve alone．
　　Several months passed in this way． Dora and I wrote to each other every day， and occasionally I was able to visit her at Miss Mills's house． But one morning when I arrived at the office for work， Mr Spenlow greeted me very coldly and asked me to step into his office， where we could talk privately．When I entered the room，I was surprised to see Miss Murd-stone standing by his desk， staring unpleasantly at me． I knew at once that Dora's father had discoversd our secret， and I guessed who had told him．
　　‘ Mr Copperfield，’ said Mr Spenlow， frowning sternly at me，‘ I am sorry to say that Miss Murdstone has found some letters which appear to be from you to my daughter Dora． Are they yours？’
　　I looked at the letters he handed to me， blushed， and whispered，‘ Yes， sir，’ Poor little Dora！I hoped she had not been frightened by that horrible Murdstone woman． I hated to think Of Dora's unhappiness at losing my letters．
　　‘ I suspected something was wrong when Miss Spenlow came back from her last visit to Miss Mills，’ said Miss Murd-stone， looking very pleased with herself．‘ I always said Julia Mills was not a suitable friend for Miss Spenlow， and I was right！’
　　Mr Spenlow appeared to agree， but rather sadly．
　　‘ I am very sorry， sir，’ I said，‘ but it is all my fault． Please don't blame Dora—’
　　‘ Miss Spenlow to you， young man！’ said her father angrily.
　　‘ I know it wasn't right to keep it secret， sir， but I love your daughter，and I hope that one day—’
　　‘ Don't speak to me of love， Mr Copperfield！ cried Mr Spenlow．‘ You are both much too young！ We'll throw these letters in the fire， and you must promise to forget the whole thing． There is no question of your marrying Dora！’
　　‘ But sir，I can't forget her！I love her！’ I protested．
　　‘That is my last word， M Copperfield！ When you have time to consider， you'll realize it's wiser to do as I say． Now go to your work！’
　　I spent all day thinking of poor sweet Dora， and how she must be feeling． In the evening I hurried round to Miss Mills's house， but although she spoke wisely of love and broken hearts， she could not offer me any practical advice.
　　The next day， after a sleepless night， I arrived at the office at the normal time， and discovered all the clerks standing talking at the front door． This was so unusual that I stopped to ask what had happened.
　　‘ Why，don't you know？’ asked one of them．‘The police have found Mr Spenlow dead！’I fell back， shocked．
　　‘ You look very pale， Mr Copperfield！’ said another．‘Sit down here， sir！’
　　‘ Tell me——tell me what happened， I gasped．
　　‘Well， he went into town to dinner last night， and the carriage and horses came back at midnight without him. He was driving himself， you see． So the servants went to look for him， and found him dead in the road． He must have been ill，and have fallen out of the carriage． Anyway， he was dead when they found him.’
　　This was a terrible shock to me． Perhaps his anger with me had made him ill.In that case I was partly to blame for his death． But I am sorry to say I was also jealous of Dora's sadness． White she was crying for her dead father， she was not thinking of me， and I selfishly wanted to be the only person in her life．
　　In the next few weeks I became quite desperate because I could not see or speak to my sweet Dora． Miss Mills reported that Dora cried all day， and when my name was mentioned，only sobbed more loudly and said，‘Oh poor dear Father！How wicked of me to keep a secret from him！ Oh！ Oh！’ So I did not feel encouraged to visit her． Soon after her father's funeral， Dora was taken to live with her two aunts at Putney，in south London， where she seemed to be further away from me than ever.
　　My aunt， meanwhile， began to be seriously worried about my health， as I was getting more and more depressed． So she suggested I should go to Dover for a few days， to make sure that her house was still in good condition， and then to Canter-bury， to visit the Wickfields． I agreed willingly， as I was always happy to see Agnes． It was easy to take a few day's hoilday from my work at the lawcourts and with Dr Strong．
　　I was glad to find that the person who was renting my aunt's house in Dover was looking after it well． I was then free to continue my journey to Canterbury， that beautiful ancient city， which seemed very little changed since my schooldays． The soft， clean air made me feel better than I had done for weeks．
　　When I arrived at the Wickfields’House， I found Mr Micawber in Uriah Heep's old office. We were pleased to see each other， but we both felt a little embarrassed. I realized that he did not want to talk about confidential matters concerning the firm of Heep and Wickfield， and he knew that I disliked his employer， Heep． So conversation was difficult，and in the end I was glad to leave him， and go upstairs to look for Agnes.
　　I found her in her sitting-room， and she looked up at me with such a warm welcome in her smile that I was very moved．
　　‘Ah， Agnes！’ I sald．‘ I've missed you so much recently！You helped me such a lot in the old days that I suppose I never learnt to think for myself． I always feel I need your help and advice． I get into such trouble， and I get so worried， and have so little confidence in myself， but when I'm with you， you give me purpose！ You make me strong！ What is your secret，my dear adopted sister？’
　　Agnes gave me her hand， which I kissed， and she went on，in her sisterly way， to listen sympathetically as I told her everything that had happened in the past few weeks． As usual，she knew the right thing to do．She advised me to write to Dora's aunts， to ask if I could visit Dora occasionally， and she encouraged me in my hopes of marriage． I felt again that peace which Agnes always brought to me．
　　We had not been sitting together long when Mrs Heep came in．She did not leave us for a moment all that evening， and I wondered whether Uriah had told her to watch over us．Whenever I looked at Agnes's lovely face， I saw Mrs Heep's evil black eyes staring at me．
　　The next day， Mrs Heep did not leave Agnes and me alone even for a minute． The Heeps， mother and son， seemed to me like two ugly great black birds hanging over the house， and they made me so uncomfortable that I went out for a walk in the afternoon． I was walking along a path near the house，wondering if I should warn Agnes about Uriah's plan of marriage，when I heard footsteps behind me，and turned to see Uriah himself running after me．
　　‘Wait for me， Mr Copperfield！’ he cried．
　　‘Actually，’ I said，‘I came out to be alone．’
　　‘ Ah！’ he said， with his oily smile，‘ you don't like my mother being there all the time， do you？’
　　‘No，I don't，’I replied，not caring if I sounded rude.
　　‘ But you see，’ he continued，‘ in my humble position，I have to be very careful． I'm not married to my Agnes yet，and you're a dangerous rival， Mr Copperfield．’
　　‘What！’I cried in disgust．‘ You allow Miss Wickfield no peace in her own home because of me？Don't you realize I think of her as my very dear sister， nothing more？ Let me tell you I am engaged to another lady！ There！ Is that enough for you？’
　　‘ Oh Mr Copperfield！’ cried Uriah， gratefully shaking my hand with his cold fishy one．‘ I'll tell Mother to stop watching you at once！ Why didn't you tell me that before？ I know you've never liked and trusted me，as I've liked you！’
　　We returned to the house together in silence． That evening after dinner， when Agnes and Mrs Heep had left us， Uriah said to Mr Wickfield，‘Let's have some wine， partner，and drink to young Mr Copperfield's health． It isn't often we have the pleasure of his company， is it， partner？’
　　I knew Uriah was deliberately encouraging Mr Wickfield to drink too much， but I saw that although Agnes's father was aware of his weakness， he could no longer stop himself． As the evening passed， I was disgusted to see that Uriah became more and more cheerful as Mr Wickfield became more and more drunk． Finally Uriah stood up with a glass in his hand．
　　‘ Come， partner！’ he said with his evil smile．‘Let's drink to the health of the most beautiful woman in the world！’
　　Poor， broken Mr wickfield looked for a moment at the picture of his dead wife on the wall， so similar to Agnes．
　　‘ I may be humble，’ continued Uriah，‘but I admire， no， I love your daughter Agnes！’
　　Suddenly a horrible cry came from Mr Wickfield．He had stood up， and was screaming with anger． He behaved so wildly and desperately that I thought he had gone mad．‘ My child and you， Heep！ No， never！ You've taken everything from me ， my business， my good name， my home， but you'll never take her！’
　　‘ Perhaps I've said too much too soon，’ said Uriah， looking uncomfortable．‘But you'll be sorry， partner， if you say any more！ You need me， remember？ You've got nothing without me！ Remember that before you accuse me of anything！’
　　Just then the door opened and Agnes entered silently．
　　‘ You're not well， Father， come with me，’ she whispered gently， and helped the ashamed old man out． I thought she must have heard what had been said．
　　Later that night she came to say goodnight to me in the sitting-room， where I was alone， reading．
　　‘ Agnes， my dear sister，’ I said to her，‘ promise me that you will never agree to marry that evil creature， for any reason！’
　　Through her tears she smiled calmly at me．‘ Don't worry，brother，I'm not afraid of him． My duty is to take care of Father， and I trust in God for the rest． Goodnight， David．’






■ 9 David gets married
　　When I returned to London， I was delighted to discover that Dora's aunts had decided to allow me to visit her． So every Saturday and Sunday I walked to their house in Putney， and spent the afternoons there． Sometimes Dora sang or played the guitar， sometimes we walked by the river， and sometimes I brought Traddles or my aunt with me． What happy times they were！
　　Mr Spenlow had seemed a very rich man to me， but when he died the lawyers discovered that Dora would not inherit much from him after all， as there were many debts to pay． So I did not feel worried that anyone would suspect me of marrying Dora for her money． Mr Spenlow's firm lost a lot of business after his death， and I realized I would have to find another profession． I had always been good at writing， so I continued as secretary to Dr Strong， and also began reporting what was said in parliament， for the daily newspapers． I even wrote some stories， which were published in magazines， and was very pleased with the money I was earning．
　　The months passed， and I reached my twenty-first birthday． Traddles was still studying to be a lawyer， and still hoping to marry ‘the dearest girl in the world’． I had moved out of my flat into a pleasant little house， and at last Dora's aunts had agreed to our marriage． I was looking forward to the happiest day of my life． The next few days went by very fast in a mist of excitement and happiness． My aunt and Mr Dick moved into an even smaller house near mine， and Peggotty travelled from Yarmouth to be present at my wedding．
　　I had always wanted Agnes to meet Dora， so I was glad when they met， the day before the wedding . It was beautiful to see Dora's pretty face next to Agnes's calm one， and Dora whispering her secrets into Agnes's ears，as a child does to its mother． But after Agnes had gone to see my aunt， Dora said seriously to me， when we were alone，‘ Perhaps if I'd had Agnes as a friend when I was younger， David dear， I wouldn't be so foolish and silly.’
　　‘ But I love you as you are， Dora！’ I replied.
　　‘ I wonder why you ever fell in love with me！’
　　‘ Because nobody can see you， and not fall in love with you！’
　　‘ But if you'd never seen me， David， I wonder who you'd have married…’
　　I laughed and kissed her pretty lips， and she was soon as cheerful as usual again.
　　I cannot remember much about the wedding， except Dora by my side， in her beautiful dress and with a blushing face .Only when we were driving away from Putney together， did I wake from the dream． I believed it at last！ It was my dear little wife I was sitting next to， whom I loved so much！
　　It seemed strange to return from our week's holiday and to find myself in my own small house with Dora． It was difficult to believe that we were going to spend the rest of our lives together． But soon I realized that married life was not as comfortable as it appeared． Neither Dora nor I knew anything about managing the house． We had a servant， of course， who managed us． She served our meals late， drank all our wine，and stole all our silver spoons． When she finally left， we had another who behaved in a similar way． I felt I had to speak to Dora about it．
　　‘ My love，’ I began，‘ couldn't you perhaps control the servants a little better？’
　　‘ David， don't be cross with your little Dora，’ she said，coming to sit on my knee． But I wanted to show I could be firm．
　　‘My sweet Dora， I really do think you should do something． I mean， yesterday I had no supper at all because the beef was burnt， and last week， when Traddles came to dinner， the meat wasn't cooked at all！’
　　‘You knew before you married me what a silly girl I am！You shouldn't have married me if you were going to be angry with me！I don't think you love me at all！’ And large tears ran down her pretty little face．
　　‘ Dora，my love！ Of course I love you！Don't cry！’ I could not continue our conversation then． But when she was calmer，and had dried her tears， she said very seriously， ‘David， will you do something for me？ Will you call me your child-wife？’
　　‘ Whatever do you mean， my dearest？’ I asked in surprise．
　　‘Just that， whenever you feel I'm being very foolish， you should remember that I'm like a child， not as clever as you， or anyone else．Don't be disappointed with me， just remember that your child-wife loves you very， very much．’
　　Of all the conversations we had， I remember that one very clearly． It made a strong impression on me， and I am glad now that I did not try to change Dora any more． I had fallen in love with an innocent child-like girl，and I could not expect her to become a wise， experienced woman in such a short time． But this meant that I had to carry all Our problems on my own shoulders， and sometimes I felt sorry that I did not have a real partner in life， with whom to share these worries．
　　At about this time， my first book was published， and was a great success． Dora and my aunt were equally proud of me． I was becoming， however， rather worried about Dora． She had been ill for some time， and did not seem to be getting better．She was not strong， and could not walk anywhere by herself．I began to carry her downstairs every morning， and upstairs every night， and my aunt came every day to look after her．My little wife was still very pretty， and cheerful， but I knew how light she was， and how weak． I began to fear she would not be with me for much longer．
　　Early one morning when I was walking in the garden， I saw Danie I Peggotty opening the gate and coming towards me． His clothes were dusty， and he looked older than before， with white hair escaping untidily from under his hat． But his face was brown， and he looked healthy and strong．
　　‘ Master David！’ he said gladly，when he saw me．‘I've come to tell you—you were always our friend—I've found her！’
　　‘ You've found little Emily！’ I cried delightedly．‘ But where— and how？’
　　‘ I heard she'd travelled with that wicked Steerforth to Italy， and lived there for a while． But in the end he became tired of her， and left her．She didn't know what to do， or where to go， poor thing！ But she came back to London． And that’ s where I found my dear child！ Because I've been all over Europe looking for her， but I knew she'd come back to England one day．So every night I've been searching the city streets for her． And last night I found her， hopeless and exhausted， on a bridge looking down into the river． If I hadn’ t found her then，I don't like to think what she would have done！ But God was looking after my dear girl， and she's safe with me now．’ He passed his strong hand over his eyes， and smiled at me．‘ I've planned what we'll do， Master David，and I want to tell you about it． Emily and I are going to Australia．It's a new country， where nobody knows anything about her past．We'll be able to start a new life together．We'll be leaving in about six weeks．’
　　‘ Very sensible，’I said．‘ And what about the rest of your family？Are Ham and Peggotty going to Australia too？’
　　‘ No， they aren't．Poor Ham will never be the same again．I really think his heart is broken．But he's got a good job， and is very popular in Yarmouth，so he'll stay there． My sister wants to stay too，partly because of you ，Master David， and partly to look after Ham．She cooks and cleans for him in Yarmouth， you know．’
　　‘Well，my friend，’I said，shaking hands firmly with the old boatman，‘ I wish you and Emily all the best in your new life．’
　　‘ I'll do my duty， whether I'm in England or Australia，’said Daniel．‘ And I'll never be separated from my little Emily again！’






■ 10 Death and discovery
　　Traddles and I had both received rather strange letters from Mr Micawber， in which he asked us to come to Canterbury， with my aunt． At this meeting， he said， he would show to all of us the proof of Uriah Heep's wickedness．Dora was too ill to come with us， so Traddles， my aunt， Mr Dick and I travelled to Canterbury by coach， spent the night in a hotel there，and arrived punctually at the Wickfields’house the next morning． Mr Micawber met us at the door and showed us into Uriah Heep's office． Uriah himself seemed rather surprised to see us， but pretended to welcome us as old friends． Mr Micawber brought Agnes into the room too， and then stood firmly by the door．
　　‘Don't wait， Micawber，’ said Uriah to his assistant．
　　But Mr Micawber did not move．He stared coldly at his employer.
　　‘ Did you hear what I said， Micawber？’ said Uriah angrily，his little eyes becoming redder while his long face went very pale．
　　‘ Yes！’ replied Micawber．‘ But I don't choose to leave．Listen to me， Heep！ I don't care if I lose my job！I don't wish to work any longer for the wickedest man in England！’
　　Uriah fell back， shocked． Looking slowly round at us， with a dark， evil expression on his face， he said，‘ I see！You've all arranged this between you！ But I know who to blame for this！It's you，Copperfield！ You're jealous of my new position ，aren't you？But I know things about all of you which I can use against you—for example，I know about your father's business mistakes， Miss Agnes， and I know about your past in the warehouse，Copperfield！So be careful，I warn you all！’
　　‘Mr Micawber，’ I said calmly，‘please tell us what you were going to say about this man！’
　　Just then Traddles， who had disappeared a few minutes before，reappeared with Mrs Heep．Uriah had not noticed Traddles before．‘ Who are you？’ he demanded angrily．
　　‘ I am a lawyer and a friend of Mr Wickfield， sir，’ said Traddles， in a businesslike way．‘ And he's asked me to carry out all his business arrangements from now on．’This came as a surprise to me as well as to Uriah．
　　‘The old fool has been drinking too much again！’ said Uriah，looking uglier than ever．‘ You can't believe anything he says！And you've bribed my assistant，I suppose，to speak against me！’
　　‘ It's you who have been dishonest，’ said Traddles firmly，‘as we shall hear from Mr Micawber．’And we all looked expectantly towards that large， important-looking gentleman．He was clearly delighted to have such an interested audience，and cleared his throat several times before starting to speak．As he spoke， his voice became louder and louder with excitement， until he was almost shouting．
　　‘ Ladies and gentlemen，’he began，‘ when very poor and desperate for work， I came to Canterbury as assistant to this evil man Heep．I am sorry to say I was soon involved in all his wicked plans．I may be poor， but I can't accept his lies， his cheating， his bribes and all the rest of it． And so I've brought you here today， ladies and gentlemen， to hear me accuse Heep publicly！ One， he has confused and lied to his partner so often that poor Mr Wickfield now thinks he has himself been dishonest．Two， he has sometimes copied Mr Wickfield's signature on to false documents and cheques． Three， for years he has been stealing large amounts of money from Mr Wickfield and the firm！’
　　‘ You can never prove it！’ cried Uriah wildly．
　　‘ I have taken copies of all the necessary documents，’said Mr Micawber confidently，‘ while working as your clerk． And just to make sure， I've given them to Mr Traddles to keep safely．’
　　‘ Uriah，my dear boy，’cried his mother，sobbing bitterly，‘ tell them how humble you are！Say you didn't mean to hurt anyone！ Say you're sorry，and arrange matters with these gentlemen！Do，dear boy！’
　　‘ Mother， be quiet！’he whispered angrily．‘ Don't help my enemies！Copperfield here would have given you a hundred pounds to say what you've just said！’
　　Suddenly my aunt attacked Uriah， hitting his head with her umbrella．‘ Give me back my investments！’ she cried．‘ I thought Mr Wickfield had lost my money， and I didn't want to hurt Agnes by saying so！ But now I know you've had control of the firm，and you've stolen my money…’Somehow I managed to get her away from him before she hurt him too badly．
　　Then Mrs Heep fell on her knees to all of us， begging us to forgive her dear boy， and to remember how humble he always was．
　　‘ Be silent，Mother！’ said her son． He turned to Traddles and asked unpleasantly，‘ Well？ What are you asking me to do？’
　　‘ Not asking， demanding， Heep． You will give us the keys to all your boxes and drawers， all your documents and cheque-books， everything in fact that belongs to the firm． You will stay in this house until we've checked all the documents．’
　　‘ And if I don't agree？’ he asked， frowning．
　　‘ Copperfield， perhaps you would fetch a couple of policemen． Things move slowly in the lawcourts， but in the end Mr Wickfield will get his business back， and you， Heep，will be in prison for a very long time．’
　　Uriah realized that he had to do what we wanted， and went to fetch the documents， with Mr Dick at his side． At the door， with his blackest， most evil expression， Heep turned and said to me，‘ I've always hated you，Copperfield！’ Then he was taken away．
　　In the next few days Traddles and Micawber worked very hard together to put right what Uriah had done．They discovered my aunt's money and gave it back to her， and paid all the firm's debts．Mr Wickfield decided to sell his business， and retire． The Wickfields would not have much money， but at least they did not owe anything． In the end Uriah Heep and his mother left Canterbury， but we all thought he was too evil to stay out of trouble for long．
　　My aunt had a wonderful idea for the Micawber family．‘Have you ever thought of going to live in Australia？’ she suggested．‘ It's a new country， with a lot of business opportunities．’
　　Mr Micawber was very interested．‘ Something could easily turn up there，’ he agreed． My aunt generously offered to lend him the necessary money to pay for the journey， and the whole Micawber family started planning and packing immediately．
　　When I returned to London， I realized my poor Dora was much worse． She stayed upstairs all the time now， and the sitting-room seemed very quiet without my little child-wife in her usual place．One day when I was sitting with her in her room，she said lovingly，‘You know， David dear， I'm afraid I was too young.’
　　‘ Don't say that，Dora！’I whispered，conscious that she was speaking of herself in the past．
　　‘I was a silly little girl， David， and you know it． It's just as well that I won't live much longer．Perhaps if I lived，you'd wish you'd married someone more sensible， more practical，someone like…’ She did not finish what she was saying．
　　‘ But we've been so happy， Dora！’I said，trying not to cry.
　　She took my band and kissed it．‘We have， haven't we？David， do you think if you asked Agnes， she'd come and see me？ I have something particular to say to her．’
　　‘Of course， my love， I'll write to her tonight．’
　　Agnes came the next day， and went straight upstairs to see Dora．Although the doctor and my aunt had told me there was no hope that Dora would live， when I held her hand and saw her love for me in her innocent blue eyes，I could not believe she would be taken from me．But when Agnes came downstairs so calmly and silently， and said nothing，but raised her hand and pointed upwards，I knew！It was over，and I remembered only darkness for a long time afterwards．
　　In the middle of my terrible sadness I received a message from Emily．She asked me to take a letter from her to Ham her last words to the man who had loved her so much——before she and Daniel left England for Australia． They were sailing in two weeks’ time， and the Micawbers were going on the same ship. I remembered my childish love for little Emily， and agreed to do what she asked．
　　The weather was very stormy as I travelled through the night to Yarmouth．Several times the coach was almost knocked off the road by the wind and the rain． By the time we arrived in Yarmouth， most of the local people were in the streets， afraid to stay in their houses， in case the roof or the chimney blew down． Many women were crying， afraid for their husbands or brothers who were out fishing in their small boats． The sea itself， with its huge waves crashing noisily on the beach， frightened us all very much．
　　I went to the hotel， and tried to sleep a little after my tiring journey． But the wind made so much noise that I could not sleep， and I went down to the beach again， where a lot of people were standing together， watching the waves． By now the storm had got even worse．
　　‘ Two ships have gone down， sir！’ a local fisherman shouted to me．‘ A few miles away！ We couldn't save any of the men on them！ The waves were too high！ And look！ There's another！’
　　And suddenly I gasped in horror． I could see a great ship，which had been pushed violently on to the rocks by the waves．It was in danger of falling back into the waves， or of breaking in half， at any moment. Several figures were visible on the ship ， especially one very active， curly-haired young man， who seemed to be giving orders． The crowd on the beach cried out as the ship rolled and a huge wave swept over it， carrying the men into the rushing water．In a moment the only figure we could see was the curly-haired young man， holding desperately on to the side of the ship and calling for help． What could we do ？ It was certain death for any man to enter those waves．
　　Just then I saw Ham Peggotty running through the crowd to the edge of tM water． One end of a rope was tied around his waist， and the other end was held firmly be three strong men standing on the beach．
　　‘ No， Ham！’I cried，trying to hold him back．‘ Don't try to rescue that poor sailor！You'll kill yourself！’
　　‘ Let me go，Master David！’he replied cheerfully，shaking both my hands．‘ If God thinks it’ s time for me to die， then I'm ready！ Friends，I'm going in！Give me more rope！’
　　He dived in under a great wave， and swam strongly towards the ship． In another moment he would have reached it， when a high green hill of water appeared，and the ship went down with a great crash．The people on the beach pulled on Ham's rope， and he arrived at my feet—dead． They carried him to the nearest house， and I called a doctor， but nothing could be done for him．He had been beaten to death by that great wave， and his generous heart had stopped for ever．
　　As I sat hopelessly by his bed， a fisherman who had known me when Emily and I were children， came to tell me he recognized the curly-haired sailor， whose body had been thrown out of the water by the waves． I went to see． And there on the beach where she and I had played， I saw Steerforth lying，with his handsome face on his arm． He would never smile at me or Emily again．
　　I was surrounded by too many ghosts to return to London and my old life． I was selfishly sad that I had lost my child-wife and my childhood friend，and sometimes I felt I wanted to die．So I left England， and travelled for many months in Europe． I lived in a dark， miserable dream， with no hope or interest in my future．
　　One evening I arrived in a village in Switzerland， and received a packet of letters that had been waiting for me． The first one I opened was from Agnes．She gave me no advice，but she told me simply that she trusted me to find a purpose in life，and that she would always be proud of me， and love me as a sister．
　　As the light died out of the sky，and I watched the colour of the snow on the mountain tops change， I felt I was waking from my unhappy dream， and I began to understand how much I loved Agnes．She had been the one who had always guided and supported me， and now I realized I needed her love for the rest of my life． Had falling in love with Dora been a mistake？We had both been very young， it is true． I had always called Agnes sister， and now perhaps I no longer had the right to ask whether her love for me was more than sisterly．
　　However， I decided to return， and travelled home to England， after three years of absence．I was delighted to find that Traddles had married his Sophy， and was doing well as a lawyer． My aunt had moved back to her old Dover house， and was living happily there with Mr Dick and Peggotty． When I visited my aunt， I took the opportunity of asking her about Agnes.
　　‘Has she—has she any young man she'd like to marry？’ I asked as lightly as possible．
　　My aunt looked carefully at me as she replied，‘ I suspect she has， David． She's never mentioned it to me， but I think—I feel sure she's going to marry soon．’
　　I was firm with myself and did not show my feelings． I borrowed a horse and rode to Canterbury to ask Agnes myself．When I saw that beautiful， gentle face again， I knew I had come home． I knew how dear she was to me， and would always be．
　　‘ Agnes，’I said，‘ I am so grateful to you， for making me what I am ， for helping me to be good！ But I think you have a secret． Let me share it， Agnes， as your brother！ Tell me whom you love！’
　　Agnes turned away from me and burst into tears． Somehow these tears did not sadden me， but gave me hope．‘ My dear Agnes！Don't cry！’
　　‘David， leave me！ I can't talk about it now！’ she sobbed．
　　‘ Agnes， you're dearer to me than anything in the world．Don't think I'll be jealous of any man you choose to marry． I only want you to be happy！’
　　She had stopped crying now and was calmer．‘ If I have a secret， David， it is—not a new one． It has been my secret—for a long time！’
　　I was wild with hope．‘ Not a new one’！ Did she mean…？‘Dearest Agnes！ Dare I hope to call you more than a sister！’She was in my arms and sobbing again， but this time with happiness.‘ I went away， Agnes， loving you！I returned home， loving you！’
　　We held each other for some time， sure now of each other's love．
　　‘ There is something I must tell you， David，’ she said gently，looking calmly into my face．‘I have loved you all my life！’ She added，‘ And something else—before our sweet Dora died， she asked me—can you guess—to fill the empty place in your heart．’ And Agnes laid her head on my shoulder， and cried． And I cried with her， although we were both so happy．
　　My story has almost come to an end． I have published several books now， and I am a well-known writer．Agnes and I have been married for twenty years， and live in perfect happiness，with our children around us． We have heard from Daniel Peggotty in Australia． He and Emily have made friends there and are happy．Mr Micawber has become an important figure in a large Australian town， and his family are quite used to living there． My aunt， Mr Dick and Peggotty are all white-haired and old now， but still very fit， and they love playing with our children whenever they can． My old friend Traddles has two sons of his own， and will soon become a judge．
　　When I think of my friends and family， Agnes's lovely face shines above them all． She is here， next to me， as I write， and I hope that when my life comes to its end， she will be with me in the shadows， pointing upwards to the light！




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Wuthering Heights by Emily Bronte





■ 1 Mr Lockwood visits Wuthering Heights
　　1801 I have just returned from a visit to my landlord，Mr Heathcliff．I am delighted with the house I am renting from him．Thrushcross Grange is miles away from any town or village．That suits me perfectly．And the scenery here in Yorkshire is so beautiful！
　　Mr Heathcliff，in fact，is my only neighbour，and I think his character is similar to mine．He does not like people either．
　　‘My name is Lockwood，’I said，when I met him at the gate to his house．‘I'm renting Thrushcross Grange from you． I just wanted to come and introduce myself．’
　　He said nothing，but frowned，and did not encourage me to enter．After a while，however，he decided to invite me in．
　　‘Joseph，take Mr Lock wood's horse！’he called．‘And bring up some wine from the cellar！’Joseph was a very old servant，with a sour expression on his face．He looked crossly up at me as he took my horse．
　　‘God help us！A visitor！’he muttered to himself．Perhaps there were no other servants，I thought．And it seemed that Mr Heathcliff hardly ever received guests．
　　His house is called Wuthering Heights．The name means‘a windswept house on a hill’，and it is a very good description．The trees around the house do not grow straight，but are bent by the north wind，which blows over the moors every day of the year．Fortunately，the house is strongly built，and is not damaged even by the worst winter storms．The name‘Earn－shaw’is cut into a stone over the front door.
　　Mr Heathcliff and I entered the huge main room．It could have been any Yorkshire farmhouse kitchen，except that there was no sign of cooking，and no farmer sitting at the table. Mr Heathcliff certainly does not look like a farmer．His hair and skin are dark，like a gipsy's，but he has the manners of a gentleman．He could perhaps take more care with his appearance，but he is handsome. I think he is proud，and also unhappy.
　　We sat down by the fire，in silence.
　　‘Joseph！'shouted Mr Heathcliff．No answer came from the cellar，so he dived down there，leaving me alone with several rather fierce－looking dogs. Suddenly one of them jumped angrily up at me，and in a moment all the others were attacking me．From every shadowy corner in the great room appeared a growling animal，ready to kill me，it seemed.
　　‘Help！Mr Heathcliff！Help！’I shouted，trying to keep the dogs back．My landlord and his servant were in no hurry to help，and could not have climbed the cellar steps more slowly，but luckily a woman，who I supposed was the housekeeper，rushed into the room to calm the dogs.
　　‘What the devil is the matter？’Mr Heathcliff asked me rudely，when he finally entered the room.
　　‘Your dogs，sir！’I replied.‘You shouldn't leave a stranger with them．They're dangerous．’
　　‘Come，come，Mr Lockwood．Have some wine．We don't often have strangers here，and I'm afraid neither I nor my dogs are used to receiving them．’
　　I could not feel offended after this，and accepted the wine．We sat drinking and talking together for a while．I suggested visiting him tomorrow．He did not seem eager to see me again，but I shall go anyway.I am interested in him，even if he isn't interested in me.
　　* * *
　　Two days later Yesterday afternoon was misty and bitterly cold，but I walked the four miles to Wuthering Heights and arrived just as it was beginning to snow. I banged on the front door for ten minutes，getting colder and colder.Finally Joseph's head appeared at a window of one of the farm buildings．
　　‘What do you want？’he growled．
　　‘Could you let me in？’I asked desperately．
　　He shook his head．‘There's only Mrs Heathcliff indoors，and she won't open the door to you．’
　　Just then a young man appeared and called me to follow him．We went through the back door and into the big room where I had been before．I was delighted to see a warm fire and a table full of food．And this time there was a woman sitting by the fire．She must be Mrs Heathcliff，I thought．I had not imagined my landlord was married. She looked at me coldly without saying anything．
　　‘Terrible weather！’I remarked．There was silence．
　　‘What a beautiful animal！’I tried again，pointing to one of the dogs that had attacked me．She still said nothing，but got up to make the tea．She was only about seventeen，with the most beautiful little face I had ever seen．Her golden wavy hair fell around her shoulders．
　　‘Have you been invited to tea？'she asked me crossly．
　　‘No，but you are the proper person to invite me，’I smiled．
　　For some reason this really annoyed her．She stopped making the tea，and threw herself angrily back in her chair. Meanwhile the young man was staring aggressively at me．He looked like a farm worker，but seemed to be part of the family．I did not feel at all comfortable．At last Heathcliff came in.
　　‘Here I am，sir，as I promised！’I said cheerfully．
　　‘You shouldn't have come，’he answered，shaking the snow off his clothes．‘You'll never find your way back in the dark.’
　　‘Perhaps you could lend me a servant to guide me back to the Grange？’I asked．
　　‘No，I couldn't．There aren't any servants here except Joseph and the housekeeper．Get the tea ready，will you？’he added fiercely to the young woman．I was shocked by his unpleasantness．
　　We sat down to eat．I tried to make conversation with the three silent people round the table．
　　‘How happy you must be，Mr Heathcliff，’I began，‘in this quiet place，with your wife and—’
　　‘My wife！My wife's ghost，you mean？’
　　I suddenly realized I had made a serious mistake.So his wife was dead！Of course he was too old to be married to that young girl. She must be married to the young man next to me，who was drinking his tea out of a bowl and eating his bread with unwashed hands．Perhaps the poor girl had found no one better to marry in this uninhabited area．I turned politely to the young man.
　　‘Ah，so you are this lady's husband！’This was worse than before. His face went red，and he seemed only just able to stop himself hitting me．He muttered something I could not hear．
　　‘Wrong again，Mr Lockwood，'said Mr Heathcliff.‘No，her husband，my son，is dead．This，’he added，looking scornfully at the young man，‘is certainly not my son.’
　　‘My name is Hareton Earnshaw，’growled the young man.
　　We finished our meal in silence，and when I looked out of the window，all I could see was darkness and snow.
　　‘I don't think I can get home without a guide，’I said politely．No one answered me．I turned to the woman．
　　‘Mrs Heathcliff，’I begged，‘What can I do？Please help me！’
　　‘Take the road you came on，'she replied without interest，opening a book．‘That's the best advice I can give．’
　　‘Mr Heathcliff，I'll have to stay here for the night！’ I told him．
　　‘I hope that will teach you not to walk over the moors in bad weather，’he answered．‘I don't keep guest bedrooms．You can share a bed with Hareton or Joseph．’
　　I was so angry with them all that I could not stay there a moment longer，and rushed out into the darkness. I saw Joseph by the back door，caught hold of the lamp he was carrying，and ran with it to the gate．But the dogs chased after me and attacked me，and I was soon knocked to the ground．Heathcliff and Hareton stood at the door，laughing，as I shouted at the dogs and tried to get up．In the end I was again rescued by the housekeeper，Zillah，who ordered away the dogs and helped me to my feet．
　　I was so bruised and exhausted that I did not feel strong enough to walk home，and although I did not want to，I had to spend the night at Wuthering Heights．Nobody wished me goodnight，as Zillah took me upstairs to find a bed for me．






■ 2 Catherine Earnshaw's room
　　1801‘Quietly，sir！’whispered the housekeeper，as we climbed up the dark stairs．‘My master will be angry if he discovers which bedroom you're sleeping in.For some rea-son he doesn't want anyone to sleep there，I don't know why．They're strange people in this house，you know．Here's the room，sir.
　　But I was too tired to listen．‘Thank you，Zillah，’I said，and，taking the candle，I entered the room and closed the door.
　　The only piece of furniture in the large，dusty bedroom was a bed，placed next to the window. There were heavy curtains which could be pulled around it，to hide the sleeper from anyone else in the room．Looking inside the curtains I saw a little shelf full of books，just under the window.I put my can-dle down on the shelf，and dropped thankfully on to the bed．I closed the curtains around the bed，and felt safe from Heathcliff and everyone else at Wuthering Heights．
　　I noticed that there were names written on the wall in childish handwriting—Catherine Earnshaw，Catherine Heathcliff and Catherine Linton．Then I fell asleep，but I was woken very suddenly by a smell of burning. My candle had fallen on to a Bible on the shelf and was burning it．When I opened the Bible to see if it was damaged，I found that wherever there was an empty page，or half a page，someone had written on it，and on the first page was written ‘Catherine Earnshaw's diary，1776’．Who was the girl who had slept in this bed，written her name on the wall，and then written her diary in the Bible，twenty-five years ago？I read it with interest．
　　‘How I hate my brother Hindley！’it began．‘He is so cruel to poor Heathcliff．If only my father hadn't died！While he was alive，Heathcliff was like a brother to Hindley and me．But now Hindley and his wife Frances have inherited the house and the money，and they hate Heathcliff.That horrible old servant Joseph is always angry with Heathcliff and me because we don't pray or study the Bible，and when he tells his master，Hindley always punishes us．I can't stop crying. Poor Heathcliff！Hindley says he is wicked，and can't play with me or eat with me any more.’
　　My eyes were beginning to close again and I fell asleep．Never before had I passed such a terrible night，disturbed by the most frightening dreams．Suddenly I was woken by a gentle knocking on the window. It must be the branch of a tree，I thought，and tried to sleep again．Outside I could hear the wind driving the snow against the window．
　　But I could not sleep．The knocking annoyed me so much that I tried to open the window. When it did not open， I broke the glass angrily and stretched out my hand towards the branch．But instead，my fingers closed around a small，ice－cold hand！It held my hand tightly，and a voice cried sadly，‘Let me in！Let me in！’
　　‘Who are you？’I asked，trying to pull my hand away．
　　‘Catherine Linton，’it replied．‘I've come home．I lost my way！’There seemed to be a child's face looking in at the window.
　　Terror made me cruel. I rubbed the creature's tiny wrist against the broken glass so that blood poured down on to the bed．As soon as the cold fingers let go for a moment，I pulled my hand quickly back，put a pile of books in front of the broken window，and tried not to listen to the desperate cries outside.
　　‘Go away！’I called．‘I'll never let you in，not if you go on crying for twenty years！’
　　‘It is almost twenty years！'replied the sad little voice．‘I've been out here in the dark for nearly twenty years！’The hand started pushing through the window at the pile of books，and I knew it would find me and catch hold of me again．Unable to move，I stared in horror at the shape behind the glass，and screamed.
　　There were rapid footsteps outside my bedroom door，and then I saw the light of a candle in the room．
　　‘Is anyone here？’whispered Heathcliff．He could not see me behind the curtains，and clearly did not expect an answer.I knew I could not hide from him，so I opened the curtains wide.
　　I was surprised by the effect of my action．Heathcliff dropped his candle and stood without moving，his face as white as the wall behind him．He did not seem to recognize me.
　　‘It's only your guest，Lockwood，’I said．‘I'm sorry，I must have had a bad dream and screamed in my sleep．’
　　‘To the devil with you，Mr Lockwood！’growled my landlord．‘Who allowed you to sleep in this room？Who was it？’
　　‘It was your housekeeper，Mr Heathcliff，’I said，quickly putting my clothes on．‘And I'm angry with her myself！ No one can sleep in a room full of ghosts！’
　　‘What do you mean？’asked Heathcliff，looking suddenly very interested.‘Ghosts，you say？’
　　‘That little girl，Catherine Linton，or Earnshaw，or whatever her name was，must have been wicked！She told me she had been a ghost for nearly twenty years．It was probably a punishment for her wickedness！’
　　‘How dare you speak of her to me？’cried Heathcliff wildly．But as I described my dream，he became calmer，and sat down on the bed，trembling as he tried to control his feelings.
　　‘Mr Lockwood，’he said finally，brushing a tear from his eye，‘you can go into my bedroom to sleep for the rest of the night．I'll stay here for a while．’
　　‘No more sleep for me tonight，’I replied．‘I'll wait in the kitchen until it's daylight，and then I'll leave．You needn't worry about my visiting you again either．I've had enough company for a long time．’
　　But as I turned to go downstairs，my landlord，thinking he was alone，threw himself on the bed，pushed open the window and called into the darkness．‘Come in！Come in！’he cried，tears rolling down his face．‘Catherine，do come！My darling，hear me this time！’
　　But only the snow and wind blew into the room.
　　How could my dream have produced such madness？I could not watch his suffering any more，and went downstairs.
　　I waited in the kitchen until it was light enough outside for me to find my way through the deep snow back to Thrushcross Grange. The housekeeper there，Ellen Dean，rushed out to welcome me home. She thought I must have died in the previous night's snowstorm．With a warm fire，and a hot meal，I began to recover from my unpleasant experiences．
　　After my stay at Wuthering Heights，I thought I would never want to speak to any human being again，but by the end of the next day I was beginning to feel lonely．I decided to ask Mrs Dean to sit with me after supper.
　　‘How long have you lived in this house？’I asked her．
　　‘Eighteen years，sir. I came here early in 1783 when my mistress was married，to look after her. And when she died，I stayed here as housekeeper.’
　　‘Who was your mistress？’I asked.
　　‘Her name was Catherine Earnshaw，'she replied.
　　‘Ah，my ghostly Catherine，’I muttered quietly to myself.
　　‘She married Mr Edgar Linton，a neighbour，’added Mrs Dean，‘and they had a daughter，Cathy，who married Mr Heathcliff's son.’
　　‘Ah，so that must be the widow，young Mrs Heathcliff at Wuthering Heights！’
　　‘That's right，sir．Did you see her？I looked after her as a baby，you know. How is she？I do want to know.’
　　‘She looked very well，and very beautiful．But I don't think she's happy．’
　　‘Oh，poor thing！And what did you think of Mr Heathcliff？’
　　‘He's a rough，hard man，Mrs Dean．But I'm very interested in him．Tell me more about him.’
　　‘Well，he's very rich，of course，and mean at the same time．He could live here at Thrushcross Grange，which is a finer house than Wuthering Heights，but he would rather receive rent than live comfortably．But I'll tell you the whole story of his life，as much as I know，that is，and then you can judge for yourself.’






■ 3 Ellen Dean's story—Catherine and Heathcliff as children
　　1770 When I was a child，I was always at Wuthering Heights，because my mother was a servant with the Earnshaw family．They are a very old family who have lived in that house for centuries，as you can see from their name on the stone over the front door. I grew up with Catherine and Hindley Earnshaw，and we three played together as children.
　　One day，their father Mr Earnshaw came back from a long journey. He had travelled sixty miles to Liverpool and back on business，and was very tired.
　　‘Look what I've brought you！’he told us all，unwrapping something he was holding carefully in his arms．Catherine and Hindley were expecting presents，and they rushed eagerly to see what it was. They were very disappointed to see only a dirty，black-haired gipsy child.
　　‘I found him all alone in the busy streets of Liverpool，’Mr Earnshaw explained to them，‘and I couldn't leave him to die． He can sleep in your room．’But Hindley and Catherine were angry because they had not received any presents，and refused to let the strange child share their room．However Mr Earn－shaw insisted，and little by little the boy became accepted by the family．He was called Heathcliff，as a first and last name．No one ever discovered who his parents had been．
　　Catnerine and he became great friends，but Hindley hated him，and was often cruel to him．Old Mr Earnshaw was strangely fond of this gipsy child，and frequently punished his son for behaving badly to Heathcliff．Hindley began to be jealous of his father's feelings for Heathcliff，and saw them both as enemies．
　　This situation could not last．As Mr Earnshaw grew old and ill，Heathcliff became even more his favourite，and Hindley often quarrelled with his father．When Hindley was sent away to study，I hoped that we would have peace in the house．But then it was that old servant Joseph who caused trouble．He tried to persuade his master to be stricter with the children，and was always complaining that Heathcliff and Catherine did not spend enough time studying the Bible or attending church services．
　　Catherine was a wild，wicked girl in those days．We had to watch her every moment of the day，to stop her playing her tricks on us．She was proud，and liked giving orders．But she had the prettiest face and the sweetest smile you've ever seen．I could forgive her anything when she came to say she was sorry.
　　She was much too fond of Heathcliff，and the worst punishment we could invent was to keep her separate from him．Her father could no longer understand her or her behaviour，and Catherine did not realize that his illness made him less patient with her．
　　At last Mr Earnshaw found peace．He died quietly in his chair by the fire one October evening in 1775．The night was wild and stormy，and we were all sitting together in the big kitchen．Joseph was reading his Bible at the table，while Catherine had her head on her father's knee．He was pleased to see her so gentle for once，and she was singing him to sleep．I was glad the old gentleman was sleeping so well．But when it was time to go to bed，Catherine put her arms round her father's neck to say goodnight，and immediately screamed，‘Oh，he's dead，Heathcliff！He's dead！’
　　Heathcliff and I started crying loudly and bitterly too．Joseph told me to fetch the doctor，so I ran to the village，although I knew it was too late．When I came back，I went to the children's room，to see if they needed me，and I listened for a moment at their door. They were imagining the dead man in a beautiful distant place，far from the troubles of this world．And as I listened，crying silently，I could not help wishing we were all there safe together.






■ 4 Catherine Earnshaw gets to know the Lintons
　　1775 Hindley came home for his father's burial．What was more surprising was that he brought a wife with him．She was called Frances，a thin，pale woman with a frequent cough．Now that Hindley was the master of the house，he ordered Joseph and me to spend our evenings in the small back-kitchen，as we were only servants，while he，his wife and Catherine sat in the main room．Catherine and Heathcliff were treated very differently．Catherine received presents，and could continue her lessons，but Heathcliff was made to work on the farm with the men，and，as a farm worker，was only allowed to eat with us in the backkitchen．They grew up like two wild animals．Hindley did not care what they did，as long as they kept out of his way，and they did not care even if he punished them．They often ran away on to the moors in the morning and stayed out all day，just to make Hindley angry．I was the only one who cared what happened to the two poor creatures，and I was afraid for them．
　　One Sunday evening they were missing at bedtime，and Hindley ordered me angrily to lock the front door．But I did not want them to stay out in the cold all night，so I kept my window open to look out for them．In a while I saw Heathcliff walking through the gate．I was shocked to see him alone．
　　‘Where's Catherine？’I cried sharply．
　　‘At Thrushcross Grange，with our neighbours the Lintons，’he replied．‘Let me in，Ellen，and I'll explain what happened．’I went down to unlock the door，and we came upstairs very quietly．
　　‘Don't wake the master up！’I whispered．‘Now tell me！’
　　‘Well，Catherine and I thought we’d just walk to the Lintons’house．We wanted to see if Isabella and Edgar Linton are punished all the time by their parents，as we are．’
　　‘Probably not，’I answered．‘I expect they are good children and don't need to be punished．’
　　‘Nonsense，Ellen！Guess what we saw when we looked in at their sittingroom window？A very pretty room，with soft carpets and white walls．Catherine and I would love to have a room like that！But in the middle of this beautiful room，Isabella and Edgar Linton were screaming and fighting over a little dog！How stupid they are，Ellen！If Catherine wanted something，I would give it to her，and she would do the same for me．I would rather be here at Wuthering Heights with her，even if I'm punished by Joseph and that wicked Hindley，that at Thrushcross Grange with those two fools！’
　　‘Not so loud，Heathcliff！But you still haven't told me why Catherine isn't with you？’
　　‘Well，as we were looking in，we started laughing at them so loudly that they heard us，and sent the dogs after us．We were about to run away，when a great fierce dog caught Catherine's leg in its teeth．I attacked it，and made it let go of her leg，but the Lintons' servants appeared and caught hold of me. They must have thought we were robbers．Catherine was carried unconscious into the house，and they pulled me inside too．All the time I was shouting and swearing at them．
　　‘“What a wicked pair of thieves！”said old Mr Linton．“The boy must be a gipsy，he's as dark as the devil！”Mrs Linton raised her hands in horror at the sight of me．Catherine opened her eyes，and Edgar looked closely at her．
　　‘“Mother，”he whispered，“the young lady is Miss Earn-shaw，of Wuthering Heights. I've seen her in church occasionally．And look what our dog has done to her leg！It's bleeding badly！”
　　‘“Miss Earnshaw with a gipsy！”cried Mrs Linton．“Surely not！But I think you must be right，Edgar．This girl is wearing black，and Mr Earnshaw died recently．It must be her．I’d better put a bandage on her leg at once.”
　　‘“Why does her brother Hindley let her run around with such a companion？”wondered Mr Linton．“I remember now，he's the gipsy child Mr Earnshaw brought home from Liverpool a few years ago.”
　　‘“He's a wicked boy，you can see that，”said Mrs Linton．“And did you hear the bad language he used just now？I'm shocked that my children heard it.”’
　　‘I was pushed out into the garden，but I stayed to watch through the window．They put Catherine on a comfortable sofa，cleaned her wound and fed her with cakes and wine．I only left the house when I was sure she was well taken care of．She's a breath of fresh air for those stupid Lintons．I'm not surprised they like her．Everybody who sees her must love her，mustn't they，Ellen？’
　　‘I'm afraid you'll be punished for this，Heathcliff，’I said sadly．
　　And I was right．Hindley warned Heathcliff that he must never speak to Catherine again，or he would be sent away from Wuthering Heights，and it was decided that Catherine would be taught to behave like a young lady．
　　She stayed with the Linton family at Thrushcross Grange for five weeks，until Christmas．By that time her leg was fine，and her manners were much better than before．Frances Earn-shaw visited her often，bringing her pretty dresses to wear，and persuading her to take care of her appearance，so that when she finally came home after her long absence，she almost seemed a different person．Instead of a wild，hatless girl，we saw a beautiful，carefully dressed young lady．
　　When she had greeted all of us，she asked for Heathcliff．
　　‘Come forward，Heathcliff！’called Hindley．‘You may welcome Miss Catherine home，like the other servants．’
　　Heathcliff was used to being outside all day，and had not bothered to wash or change his clothes．His face and hands were black with dirt．In spite of this，Catherine was very glad to see him and rushed up to kiss him．Then she laughed．
　　‘How funny and black and cross you look！But that's because I'm used to Edgar and Isabella，who are always so clean and tidy. Well，Heathcliff，have you forgotten me？’
　　But，ashamed and proud，the boy said nothing，until suddenly his feelings were too much for him．
　　‘I won't stay to be laughed at！’he cried，and was about to run away，when Catherine caught hold of his hand.
　　‘Why are you angry，Heathcliff？You…you just look a bit strange，that's all．You're so dirty！’
　　She looked worriedly at her hands，and her new dress．
　　‘You needn't have touched me！’he said，pulling away his hand．‘I like being dirty，and I'm going to be dirty！’
　　As he ran miserably out of the room，Hindley and his wife laughed loudly，delighted that their plan to separate the two young people seemed to be succeeding.
　　The next day was Christmas Day．Edgar and Isabella Linton had been invited to lunch，and their mother had agreed，on condition that her darlings were kept carefully apart from‘that wicked boy’．I felt sorry for poor Heathcliff，and while the Earnshaws were at church， I helped him wash and dress in clean clothes．
　　‘You're too proud，’I scolded him as I brushed his black hair．‘You should think how sad Catherine is when you can't be together．And don't be jealous of Edgar Linton！’
　　‘I wish I had blue eyes and fair hair like him！I wish I behaved well，and was going to inherit a fortune！’
　　‘He has none of your intelligence or character！And if you have a good heart，you'll have a handsome face. Who knows who your parents were？Perhaps a king and queen，far more important than the Lintons！’
　　In this way I encouraged Heathcliff to have more confidence in himself. But when the Earnshaws and the Lintons arrived back from church，the first thing Hindley did was shout at Heathcliff.
　　‘Get out of my sight，until we've finished eating！ I'll pull that long hair of yours if you don't obey me at once！’
　　‘It is long，'said Edgar.‘I'm surprised he can see anything．’
　　This was too much for Heathcliff． He looked desperately around for a weapon，picked up a bowl of hot soup and threw it at Edgar，who started screaming. Hindley immediately took hold of Heathcliff and pushed him upstairs.
　　‘I'm sure Hindley's going to hit him！’cried Catherine.‘I hate it when Heathcliff is punished！ It's your fault， Edgar， you annoyed him！Why did you speak to him？’
　　‘I didn't，’ replied Edgar，tears in his eyes．‘I promised Mother I wouldn't．I spoke about him， not to him．’
　　‘Well，don't cry，'said Catherine with scorn．‘You've made enough trouble already. Here comes my brother.’
　　Hindley returned，hot and breathless．
　　‘That'll teach him！’he said．‘And now let's have lunch！’
　　The others seemed to forget Heathcliff，but I noticed Catherine could not eat much，and I knew she was sorry for her friend．In the evening there was music from a travelling band，and dancing in the main room. Catherine said the music sounded sweeter from high up，and so she went to sit in the dark on the stairs．When I went to find her，however，I discovered she had gone right to the top of the house to talk to Heathcliff through his locked bedroom door，and had then climbed out on to the roof and in through his window．I persuaded them both to come out of the room the same way， as I had no key to the door，and took Heathcliff down into the warm servants’kitchen with me，while Catherine returned to her guests and the dancing．
　　‘You must be hungry，Heathcliff，’I said.‘You haven't eaten all day. Have some Christmas cake，do.’
　　‘I can't eat anything，’he growled，putting his head in his hands．‘I've got to think how I can have my revenge on Hindley．I only hope he doesn't die first！He'll be sorry he's treated me like this，Ellen！’






■ 5 Catherine and Edgar
　　1778 In the summer of this year Hindley's wife Frances had her first，and last，baby．They called the boy Hareton．But the poor woman had been ill for a long time， although we had not realized it，and died soon after Hareton was born．
　　Hindley only had room in his heart for two people，himself and his wife，so when she died，he was in despair. He neither cried nor prayed. Instead he swore at God and man，and drank himself to sleep every night．The servants all left him，except for Joseph and me．Joseph enjoyed being able to scold his wicked employer，with warnings from the Bible，and I could not leave Miss Catherine. After all，I had grown up with her and Hindley.
　　But the master's behaviour was a bad example for Catherine and Heathcliff.At fifteen，Catherine was the most beautiful girl for miles around，but she was proud and quick－tempered. She led what was almost a double life. At Wuthering Heights，under Heathcliff's influence，she annoyed Hindley，laughed at Joseph，and was rude to me．But at Thrushcross Grange，which she often visited，she showed a different，calmer side of her character，and was polite，intelligent and amusing. The Lintons all liked her，and poor Edgar had fallen in love with her.
　　Heathcliff was sixteen at this time. He did not have time to study any more，and the long hours of work on the farm made him tired and dull. There was always an angry expression on his face，and he did not even try to keep himself clean and tidy．He seemed to want people to dislike him．Catherine and he still spent time together，when he was not working in the fields，but he no longer expressed his fondness for her in words，and he looked angry if she touched or kissed him．
　　One afternoon，when Hindley had gone into town，Heath－ cliff came into the main room after lunch. I was helping Catherine to arrange her hair，as she had invited Edgar Linton to visit her while Hindley was absent．
　　‘Catherine，are you going anywhere this afternoon？’asked Heathcliff．‘Why have you got that silk dress on？Nobody's visiting you，I hope．’
　　‘No-o，I don't think so，'replied Catherine，looking quickly at me．‘But you should be at work by now，Heathcliff．’
　　‘That devil Hindley isn't away very often．I'm taking a holiday．I won't work any more today． I'm staying with you this afternoon．He'll never know．’
　　Catherine thought for a moment. Somehow she had to prepare him for Edgar's visit ‘Isabella and Edgar said they might call here this afternoon．If they come，you'll be scolded for not working．’
　　‘Tell Ellen to say you're busy and can't see them，’he said．‘Those friends of yours take up all your time．You spend most of your evenings with them，not with me．’
　　‘Well，why should I always spend my time with you？'she asked crossly．‘What can you talk about？How can you amuse me？’
　　‘You never told me before that you didn't like my company，Catherine！’cried Heathcliff．
　　Just then we heard a horse outside， and there was a light knock on the door．Edgar Linton entered，his handsome face full of delight at receiving Catherine's unexpected invitation． I wondered if Catherine was comparing her two friends， as Edgar came in and Heathcliff ran out．
　　‘I haven't come too soon，have I？’asked Edgar politely．
　　‘No，’answered Catherine．‘Leave us alone，Ellen．’
　　‘I'm just doing my work，miss，’I replied，pretending to dust the furniture．Hindley had told me to be present if Edgar Linton came to visit Catherine．
　　She came up to me，and whispered crossly，‘Go away，Ellen！’Keeping her back to Edgar，she cruelly scratched my arm．
　　‘Oh！’ I screamed，to show Edgar what had happened．‘What a wicked thing to do，miss！You have no right to hurt me！’
　　‘I didn't touch you，you lying creature！'she cried angrily，and，unable to control herself，hit me hard on the face．
　　‘Catherine，love！Catherine！’cried Edgar，shocked．
　　The baby，Hareton，who followed me everywhere，immediately started sobbing and saying，‘Wicked aunt Catherine！’
　　She picked him up and shook the poor child until he screamed．Edgar rushed up to her and tried to stop her．At once she turned and hit him over the ear as hard as she could．
　　The young man looked very pale and went straight to the door．
　　‘Where are you going，Edgar Linton？'she asked．‘Don't leave me！I shall be miserable all night！’
　　‘Can I stay after you have hit me？’he replied．‘You've made me afraid and ashamed of you．I won't come here again！’
　　‘Well，go then，if you want to！'she cried．‘I'm going to cry until I'm ill！’and she dropped on to the floor，her shoulders shaking and the tears rolling down her face． Edgar managed to get as far as the door．But here he hesitated，and I called out to him to encourage him to leave．
　　‘Miss is just a selfish child，sir！You’d better ride home and forget her！’
　　But as he could not stop looking at her，I knew there was no hopeKfor him．Nothing would keep him away from her now．And sure enough，he came back into the room and shut the door．This time I left them alone，and stayed in the kitchen with little Hareton，but when I came to warn them that Hindley had returned，I realized that their quarrel had only brought them closer together．






■ 6 Heathcliff disappears
　　1778—9 Hindley came into the kitchen，swearing terribly，just as I was about to hide little Hareton，in a cupboard．I was always afraid that Hindley would hurt his small son，either by accident or on purpose，when he was drunk，so I tried to keep Hareton out of the way．But this time Hindley discovered my plan．
　　‘Ah，you keep my son in a cupboard，do you！’he cried angrily，picking up a sharp kitchen knife．‘With the devil's help I'll make you swallow this，Ellen！’And he pushed the knife between my teeth．
　　I was never afraid he would hurt me，and calmly took the knife out of my mouth．
　　‘But that can't be my son，can it？’he continued aggressively，staring at the frightened littlebboy．‘If it is，he should be punished for not running to greet his father．Perhaps I'll cut his ears off！’And then suddenly his manner changed．‘No，Hareton，darling，don't cry！Kiss me，kiss your father！What？You won't？Then I'll break your neck！’
　　Poor Hareton，screaming wildly，was carried upstairs by his father．Suddenly Hindley stopped on the stairs to listen，almost forgetting what he was holding．Heathcliff had come into the house and stood at the bottom of the stairs，looking up．Just then the child jumped out of Hindley's arms and fell．I onlyhhad time to gasp inkhorror，before I saw that Heathcliff had caught him．
　　Heathcliff stared down at the child he was holding．He must have felt sorry he had saved the life of his enemy's son．I rushed to take the poor little boy in my arms，and Hindley came slowly downstairs．
　　‘Look what you've done，Mr Hindley！’I cried．‘You nearly killed your own son！What would his mother say if she were alive？’
　　‘Take him away，Ellen And you，Heathcliff，go away too．I won't murder you tonight，unless perhaps I set the house on fire．But that depends how I feel．’And he poured himself a drink．
　　‘Don't drink any more，Mr Hindley！’I begged．
　　‘What difference does it make？’he growled．‘Get out，both of you！To the devil with you！’
　　We left him swearing at us，and went back into the kitchen．
　　‘It's a pity he can't kill himself with drink，'muttered Heathcliff．‘Dr Kenneth says he'll live longer than any of us，he's so strong．’
　　He walked out of the door and，I thought，into the fields In fact I discovered later that he was sitting just under the window，and could hear everything that was said in the kitchen．
　　I was singing little Hareton to sleep when Catherine came in．
　　‘Are you alone，Ellen？'she whispered．‘Where's Heath cliff？’
　　‘He's out on the farm，’I answered．
　　She looked sad and worried，and I even saw a tear or two on her face．But I had not forgotten how she had lied，and behaved so badly to me as well as to Edgar Linton，so I did not feel sorry for her，or encourage her to talk．
　　‘Ellen，will you keep a secret for me？'she asked in the end，giving me her sweetest smile．‘I must tell you！I need your advice．Today Edgar Linton has asked me to marry him，and I gave him an answer．Now，before I tell you if it was yes or no，you tell me which I should have said．’
　　‘Really，Miss Catherine，how can I know？Perhaps you should have refused him．He must be a fool to ask you，after you were so rude and violent this afternoon．’
　　‘Well，I accepted him，Ellen！'she said crossly．‘But should I have done so？Should I？What do you think？’
　　‘First，do you love him？’I asked．
　　‘Of course I do，'she replied．
　　‘Why do you love him，Miss Catherine？’
　　‘Well，I do，that's enough．Well，because he's handsome，and a pleasant companion．’
　　‘Oh，that's bad，’I said，shaking my head．
　　‘And because he loves me．’
　　‘That's worse．’
　　‘Andhbecause he'll be rich，and I shall be the most important woman for miles around．’
　　‘Worst of all．But there are several other handsome，rich young men in the world．Why don't you marry one of them？’
　　‘I don't know any of them．I only know Edgar．’
　　‘Well，I don't know why you're unhappy，Miss Catherine．Your brother will be pleased，and Mr Edgar's parents will，too．You love Edgar，and Edgar loves you．What's the problem？’
　　‘here！And here！'replied Catherine，beating her head and her chest．‘In my heart and soul I know I'm wrong！Ellen，I can't live apart from Heathcliff！He is more myself than I am．Our souls are the same！I have nothing in common with Edgar．But I can't marry Heathcliff now！Hindley has made him become a poor，dull farm worker．He'll never know how I love him．’
　　I suddenly heard a movement outside the window，and saw Heathcliff stand up and walk away．I realized he had been listening until he heard Catherine say she could not marry him．Then he stayed to hear no more．
　　‘Quiet，Miss Q Catherine！’I said．‘Just imagine how hard it will be for Heathcliff when you marry Mr Edgar！He'll have no friends at all when you leave him．’
　　‘Leave him？Why should we be separated？'she asked angrily．‘Who will separate us？Nobody will dare！Edgar must learn to accept him as my friend．Didn't you ever think，Ellen，that if Heathcliff and I married，we would be very poor？But if I marry Edgar，I can help Heathcliff with my husband's money．’
　　‘That's the worst reason you've given so far for marrying Mr Edgar，’I replied，shocked.
　　‘It isn't！Heathcliff is more important to me than myself．My love for Edgar is like the leaves on the trees—I'm sure time will change it．But my love for Heathcliff is like the rocks in the ground—not beautiful，but necessary and unchanging．He's always，always in my heart—’
　　Just then Joseph entered the kitchen．I whispered to Catherine that I was sure Heathcliff had heard some of what she said．She jumped up，frightened，and rushed outside．But although we all looked everywhere for Heathcliff，there was no sign of him that night，or for many nights in the future．
　　At about midnight，while we were still waiting for him to come home，we noticed the wind was getting stronger．We could hear it whistling down the chimney，and howling all around the house．Suddenly there was a terrible crash of thunder，and the branch of a tree fell on to the roof．We were not hurt，but Joseph immediately dropped on to his knees to pray．The rain was beating down on the windows，but Catherine stayed outside，although by now her hair and clothes were completely wet．
　　In the end we all went to bed．I managed to persuade Catherine to come in，but she insisted on sleeping in the kitchen，in case Heathcliff returned during the night．In the morning we discovered that she had caught a fever，as a result of getting wet．She became seriously ill，and it was several weekshbefore Dr Kenneth would allow her out of bed．
　　When she recovered，she was invited to stay for a while at Thrushcross Grange．Unfortunately old Mr and Mrs Linton caught the fever too，and died within a few days of each other Catherine returned to us，prouder and quicker-tempered than ever，but not as strong as before．
　　‘If she gets ill again，it could be fatal，’Dr Kenneth warned us．‘My advice to you is to do whatever she wants，and don't make her angry！’So we had to obey all her orders，and Joseph and I were not allowed to scold her any more．
　　Edgar Linton was still in love with her，and thought himself the happiest man on earth when he married her three years after his parents’death She insisted on having me with her，so we moved together to Thrushcross Grange，although I was very sad to leave little Hareton with his father．
　　It's very late，Mr Lockwood．I think you should go to bed，or you'll be ill tomorrow．I can tell you the rest of the story another time．
　　Four weeks later In fact I was ill the next day，and have been ill since then．The terrible night I spent at Wuthering Height was the cause of my illness，and I blame Mr Heathcliff for it．Dr Kenneth has warned me I won't be able to go out until the spring．All I can do is lie in bed，listening to the howling wind and staring at the grey northern sky．
　　So I've decided to ask Mrs Dean to come upstairs and finish telling me her story．She tells me she's happy to continue．






■ 7 Heathcliff returns
　　1783 Well，sir，when Miss Catherine became Mrs Linton，and we went to live at Thrushcross Grange，I must say I was surprised and pleased by her behaviour．She showed great fondness for her husband，and for his sister，Isabella．He，of course，was very anxious that no one should disobey her，or make her angry．If she was depressed for a time，he blamed it on the illness she had had，and was sympathetic．But for most of the time，I believe they shared a deep and growing love for each other．
　　Unfortunately this happiness did not last．One evening I was bringing in a basket of apples from the garden，when a voice behind me said，‘Ellen，is that you？’
　　It was a deep，rather unusual voice．I turned，to see a tall，dark man in the shadow near the kitchen door．
　　‘Don't you know me？’he asked．‘Look，I'm not a stranger！’
　　‘What！’I cried in surprise，for it had been four years since he dusappeared．‘Heathcliff！Is it really you？’
　　‘Yes，’he replied，looking up at the windows of the house．‘Are they at home？Where is she？Tell me，Ellen！I must speak to her！’
　　‘I'm not sure if you should see her，’I hesitated．‘Will the shock be too much for her？
　　‘Go and tell her I'm here，Ellen！’he said impatiently．‘Don't make me suffer like this！’
　　I left him at the door，and went upstairs to find Mr and Mrs Linton．They were sitting quietly together，looking out over the peaceful valley．The room，and the view，and the two people，seemed so calm that I did not want to disturb them．But I had to deliver my message．
　　‘A man wants to see you，madam，’I muttered．
　　‘I'll go downstairs and see him then，'replied Catherine．‘Bring the tea up，Ellen，while I'm away．’She left the room．
　　‘Who is it，Ellen？’asked Mr Edgar．
　　‘It's that Heathcliff，sir．You remember，he used to live at Wuthering Heights．’
　　‘What！The gipsy，who worked on the farm？’he cried．
　　‘Mrs Linton would be angry if she heardpyou talking about him like that，sir．She was very upset when he ran away．She's very fond of him，you know．’
　　Mr Edgar put his head out of the window and called to his wife，‘Don't stand there in the cold，love！Bring the person in，if it's anyone special．’
　　Catherine rushed upstairs and into the room，wild and breathless．She threw her arms round her husband's neck．
　　‘Oh Edgar darling！Heathcliff's come back！’
　　‘Well，well，'said Mr Edgar crossly，‘there's no need to get excited．’
　　‘I know you didn't like him，'she said，‘but please，I beg you tobbe friends with him now．Shall I ask him to come up？’
　　‘You're suggesting inviting him up here，into our siting room？Don't you think the kitchen is more suitable for him？’
　　Catherine looked at her husband，half angry and half laughing．‘No，'she said，‘I can't sit in the kitchen．Ellen，bring two tables，one for your master and Miss Isabella，the other for Heathcliff and myself．We'll sit apart from them，as we're of a lower class！Will that please you，Edgar darling？Decide quickly！I must have him near me！’
　　‘Ellen，you go and bring him up，'said Mr Edgar．‘And Catherine，try not to behave foolishly．Remember，he's only a servant！’
　　When Heathcliff entered the sitting-room，I was surprised to see how much he had changed．He wore a confident，intelligent expression on his face，and his manner was no longer rough．Although I recognized the same black fire in his eyes，the farm boy had become a gentleman．
　　Mr Edgar was as surprised as I was，but welcomed Heath cliff as politely as he could．However，he grew more and more annoyed as he watched his wife's delighted face．She could not take her eyes off Heathcliff．
　　‘Tomorrow I won't be able tohbelieve that I've seen and touched you，Heathcliff！'she cried，catching hold of his hands．‘But how cruel of you to run away and keep silent for four years，and never think of me！’
　　‘I've thought of you more than you've thought of me，’he replied quietly．‘I heard you had married，Catherine，and I came，just to see you once，and then take my revenge on your brother Hindley．Your welcome may change my plans．You know，I've had a bitter，hard life since I last heard your voice，and If I've survived，it's all because of you！’
　　‘Catherine，'said Mr Edgar，trying to remain polite，‘please pour out the tea，or it will be cold．Mr Heathcliff will have a long walk to wherever he's staying tonight，and I'm thirsty．’
　　But Catherine was too excited，and Mr Edgar too angry，to drink any tea．After a while their guest left．We discovered that he had been invited to stay at Wuthering Heights，by Hindley．I could not understand why Hindley，who hated him，would want his company，and I felt sure it would have been better for all of us if Heathcliff had never come back．
　　Catherine could not keep her happiness to herself．In the middle of the night she woke me to talk about Heathcliff．
　　‘I just can't sleep，Ellen！'she said．‘And Edgar won't lis ten when I tell him how happy I am！He's so selfish！’
　　‘He never liked Heathcliff，’I replied，‘and he'll be angry if you go on talking about him．You think he's weak，but he could be as determined as you，about something he thinks is important．’
　　‘No！'she laughed．‘I have such confidence in Edgar's love that I think I could kill him，and he wouldn't blame me for it．He will have to learn to accept Heathcliff as my friend．’
　　‘Do you know why Heathcliff is staying at Wuthering Heights？’
　　‘Oh，yes．He explained that he went there to look for me．Hindley asked him to play cards，and when he discovered Heathcliff had a lot of money，invited him to stay there．You know how greedy my brother is．He'll make Heathcliff pay rent，and hope to win money from him at cards．Heathcliff wants to stay there to be near me．I'm so happy，Ellen！And I want everyone around me to be happy too！’
　　Catherine behaved so sweetly to her husband in the next few days that Thrushcross Grange seemed full of sunshine，and in spite of his doubts，Mr Edgar allowed Heathcliff to visit her regularly．However，Heathcliff's visits produced a result which none of us had expected．Isabella，Mr Edgar's sister，a pretty girl of eighteen，suddenly declared that she was in love with Heathcliff．Mr Edgar，who loved her dearly，was shocked．He knew that if he and Catherine had no sons，Isabella would inherit the considerable Linton fortune．He did not like the idea of the fortune passing to Heathcliff，as Isabella's husband．But more importantly，he suspected that Heathcliff was hiding his ture wickedness under his gentleman ly appearance．
　　Catherine tried hard to persuade Isabella that Heathcliff was not worth loving，but poor Isabella was jealous of Catherine's relationship with Heathcliff and would not listen．Finally，Catherine told Heathcliff himself that Isabella was in love with him．She thought she knew what his answer would be．
　　‘How could I ever love that stupid girl？’he asked．‘She has a miserable pale face，and weak blue eyes，just like your husband！But…she will inherit the family wealth from him，won't she？’
　　‘That's true，'replied Catherine．‘But don't think about that，Heathcliff．I hope Edgar and I will have several sons，and then they will inherit it．’
　　Catherine did not speak of this matter again，but I am sure Heathcliff often thought about it．I watched him carefully in the next few days．I hoped he would do nothing to hurt Mr Edgar，who was a kind master to me．I was worried，too，about what was happening at Wuthering Heights．Hindley and his son Hareton seemed like lost sheep to me，and I knew there was a wicked wolf just waiting for the chance to attack them．






■ 8 Catherine is ill
　　1783 The next time Heathcliff came to Thrushcross Grange，he met Isabella by chance in front of the house．I was watching from the kitchen window，as he went up to her，and，supposing that no one else could see him，kissed her．
　　‘Look，madam！’I cried to Catherine，who was passing through the kitchen．‘That devil Heathcliff told you he could never love Miss Isabella！And now he's kissing her！’
　　Sohwhen Heathcliff entered the house，Catherine was ready to scold him．
　　‘Leave Isabella alone，Heathcliff！'she ordered．‘You'll make Edgar angry！’
　　‘You think I'm afraid of that weak little creature？’he growled．‘Anyway，what difference does it make to you？I can kiss her if she likes it．I'm not your husband，you needn't be jealous of me！’
　　‘I'm not jealous of you！'replied Catherine．‘If you like Isabella，you can marry her．But do you like her？’
　　‘It's you I want to talk about，Catherine．You know you've treated me badly．And I'm going to have my revenge！Thank you for telling me Isabella's secret．I swear I'll make good use of it！’
　　At this point I went to look for my master，and told him that Catherine and Heathcliff were quarrelling in the kitchen．
　　‘How can my wife call that man a friend？’he cried angrily．‘I've been too weak with her．I can't allow him to visit her any more．Call two servants，Ellen．’He went to the kitchen．I followed him，telling the servants to wait in the hall．
　　‘Catherine！'said Mr Edgar to his wife as he entered．‘Do you think it's right to listen to this wicked man's talk？’
　　‘Have you been listening at the door，Edgar？’asked Catherine coldly．Heathcliff laughed，which made Mr Edgar even angrier．
　　‘You，sir’，he said to Heathcliff，‘are poisoning our family life．I should never have accepted you as Catherine's friend．I must inform you that you will never be allowed to enter this house again，and that if you don't leave within three minutes，you will be thrown out．’
　　‘Well，well！'replied Heathcliff，looking scornfully at Mr Edgar's small figure．．‘So，you're going to throw me out your self，are you？’
　　My master looked towards the door．I realized he wanted to call the servants，as he knew he was not strong enough to fight Heathcliff alone．But Catherine must have guessed his plan．She hurried to the door and locked it．Mr Edgar looked at her in angry surprise．
　　‘You must fight him like a gentleman，without anyone to help you！'she told her husband．‘That'll teach you to scold me！’
　　Mr Edgar tried to get hold of the key，but she threw it quickly into the hottest part of the fire．He went very pale，and could not stop his whole body trembling．
　　‘Oh Edgar！’cried his wife．‘You've lost the fight already！You aren't a man，you're a mouse！’
　　‘So that，'said Heathcliff，pointing at MrLEdgar，‘is the thing you preferred to me，Catherine．Is he crying，or is he goingIto die of fear？’
　　He went up to look more closely at Mr Edgar，who suddenly recovered and hit Heathcliff hard on the neck．While Heath cliff was getting his breath back，Mr Edgar walked out of the other kitchen door into the garden．
　　‘Now you'll never be able to come here again，'said Cather ine to Heathcliff．‘Go away quickly！He'll return with men and guns．’
　　Heathcliff was sensible enough to take her advice．He broke down the locked door and escaped，just as the master and his men returned．
　　Catherine，who was over-excited，ordered me to go upstairs with her．I hoped she would not discover that I had told Mr Edgar about her quarrel with Heathcliff．
　　‘I'm wild with anger，Ellen！'she said，when we reached the sittingroom．‘All this trouble is because of Isabella！Tell Edgar I'm in danger ofhbecoming seriously ill．I hope it's true，I want to frighten him．He's upset me badly．Why did he lis ten to us talking in the kitchen？Heathcliff says wicked things，but I know I can control him．Well，if I can't have Heathcliff as my friend，if Edgar is going to be mean and jealous，I'll try to break both their hearts by breaking my own．You must re mind Edgar how quick-tempered I am，and What Dr Kenneth said about my health．Edgar must let me do what I want！’
　　I did not feel sympathetic towards Catherine，and certainly did not want to frighten my poor master by telling him she was ill．As I was leaving the room，however，he entered．
　　‘Catherine，’he said，‘you must tell me one thing．You must choose between me and Heathcliff．Which do you intend to have？’
　　‘Leave me alone！'she cried wildly．‘I'm ill，can't you see，I can't even stand！Edgar，leave me！’
　　She fell，stiff and pale，on to the floor．Mr Edgar looked very frightened．
　　‘Don't worry，sir，’I whispered to him．‘She told me she would try to make you afraid by pretending to be ill．’
　　Unfortunately she heard me．She jumped up，her hair loose and her eyes staring，and rushed to her bedroom．We heard the key turn in the lock．
　　For the next few days she refused to speak to anyone，even me．I took her food up to her room，but she would not eat．Mr Edgar spent his time in the library，and did not ask about his wife．He hoped，I suppose，that she would come and ask him to forgive her．But I knew she was too proud to do that．
　　On the third day she unlocked her door and called me．She ate and drank eagerly，then lay down again．
　　‘Oh，why don't I die，since no one cares about me！'she muttered．‘Edgar doesn't love me at all！What is he doing all this time，Ellen？’
　　‘He's reading Mbooks in the library，madam，’I answered．
　　‘Reading books！'she cried，shocked．‘And I'm dying up here！My God！Does he know how I've changed，how ill I am？Can't you tell him I'm seriously ill，Ellen？’
　　‘You forget，Mrs Linton，that you've eaten tonight．I'm sure you'll feel better tomorrow morning．’I still wanted to make her realize how selfish she was being，although I was a little worried by her pale，almost ghostly face．
　　‘I begin to see that you don't like me，Ellen．How strange！I always thought everybody loved me！Now they are all my enemies—Isabella and Edgar and you！I'll die with cold faces around me！I've had terrible dreams these past few nights，you know．Open the window，Ellen！I'm so hot！’
　　I refused，as it was the middle of winter．She was feverish．
　　‘Who is that over there？'she asked，staring at her own face in a mirror opposite her bed．I could not make her under stand it was herself，and I began to be afraid that her illness was real．
　　‘Stay with me，Ellen，'she cried，holding my hand．‘I'm frightened of that face！I'm frightened of being alone！I wish I were in my bed at Wuthering Heights，with the wind howling through the trees．Do let me feel a breath of air from the moors，just one breath！’
　　I opened the window for a moment，then closed it．The cold air seemed to calm her．‘I wish I were a young girl again，wild and free，out on the moors with Heathcliff！Open the window again，wider this time！Why won't you？’
　　‘Because I don't want you to die of cold，’I replied．
　　‘But it's my only chance of life！'she cried，jumping out of bed and going to the window．I tried to force her back to bed，but her fever made her surprisingly strong．We looked out together into the icy darkness．There was no moon，and no lights were visible anywhere．But Catherine was sure she could see Wuthering Heights．
　　‘Look！'she said．‘There's my old home，and the church yard near it．I won't lie there alone，Heathcilff！I won't rest until you're in the grave with me！’
　　I was still holding her back from the window，and wondering what to do next，when Mr Edgar entered．
　　‘Please help，sir，’I called，‘Mrs Linton is ill．’
　　‘Catherine's ill？’he gasped．‘Shut the window，Ellen！Catherine！Why—’
　　When he saw his wife's face，he was so shocked that he stopped speaking and stared at her in horror．She was almost unconscious and did not recognize him at first．
　　‘Ah，it's you，is it，Edgar Linton？'she said after a few moments．‘You don't come when you're wanted，and now you come when you're not wanted！But whatever you say，nothing can keep me from my home，my place of rest，out there in the open air，with a gravestone at my head！’
　　‘She's feverish，sir，and doesn't know what she's saying，’I whispered．‘If she has food and rest，she'll recover．’
　　‘I want no further advice from you，Ellen Dean，'said Mr Edgar coldly．‘You knew how ill she was，and you didn't tell me！’
　　I ran downstairs and out of the kitchen door to fetch the doctor．I thought I heard the sound of horses in the distance，which seemed strange at two o’clock in the morning．And when I found Dr Kenneth，he told me someone had seen Isabella and Heathcliff meeting secretly in the garden earlier that evening．
　　That night none of us slept．We all sat together and waited，while the doctor stayed with his patient．He told us he hoped that Catherine would recover，if we kept her very quiet．
　　In the morning we discovered that Isabella's room was empty．She had run away with Heathcliff！When Mr Edgar heard the news，he just said，‘She chose to go with him．Don't speak to me of her again．I no longer think of her as my sister．’






■ 9 Isabella's story
　　1784 For two months we heard nothing of Isabella or Heathcliff．During that time Catherine was dangerously ill with brain fever，andhDr Kenneth warned us that even if she recovered，her brain would never return to normal．How ever she did seem to get better，and no one could have been happier than my master，when he saw her sitting up in bed for the first time，and beginning to take an interest in the people and things around her．He loved her so much，and took such good care of her，that I really thought she would recover．There was another reason for her to live．She was expecting a baby，and we all hoped she would have a son，who would inherit the Linton fortune．
　　Then Mr Edgar received a letter from Isabella，telling him that she and Heathcliff were married．With it was a long letter for me，which said：
　　Wuthering Heights
　　Dear Ellen，
　　I arrived here last night and heard that Catherine brother refuses to write to me，so you are the only one I can write to．Tell Edgar I still love him and Catherine，and want to return to Thrushcross Grange，but I can't！
　　The rest of this letter is for you alone，Ellen．Two questions—how did you manage to get on with the people in this house？Thay don't seem human！And（this interests me very much）what is Mr Heathcliff？A man？A madman？A devil？When you come to visit me，you must explain to me what sort of creature I've married．And you must come very soon，with a message from Edgar．
　　Heathcliff brought me here last night．This house is going to be my home，he says．He disappeared as soon as we arrived，so I entered the kitchen alone．What a miserable，depressing place it is now，Ellen！By the fire stood a dirty child．I realized he must be Catherine's nephew，Hareton，and tried to shake his hand．But he greeted me by swearing at me，so I went into the hall to find somebody else．When I knocked at another door，it was opened by a tall，thin man，with long，dirty hair hanging down to his shoulders．I knew this must be Hindley Earnshaw，Catherine's brother and Hareton's father．His eyes，and Hareton's，reminded me of Catherine．
　　‘What do you want？’he asked roughly．
　　‘My name was Isabella Linton，’I replied．‘Now I'm married to Mr Heathcliff．’
　　‘Ah，so that devil has returned！Good！’he growled．
　　You can imagine，Ellen，how unhappy I felt in that unpleasant house．I knew that only four miles away was my real home，Thrushcross Grange，containing the only people I loved in the world．But those four miles were like an ocean，which I could not cross！Don't tell Edgar or Catherine this，but I had hoped to find a friend at Wuthering Heights，some one to support me against Heathcliff．Now I realized that no one here would help me．
　　After a long silence I said，‘Please ask a maid to show me my bedroom．I'm tired after my journey．’
　　‘We have no maids here，’he answered．‘Joseph will show you Heathcliff's room，if you like．And—and—you’d better lock the bedroom door tonight！’
　　‘Why，Mr Earnshaw？’I asked．I did not want to lock myself in with Heathcliff．
　　He brought out a gun，which had a knife attached to it．
　　‘Look at this，’he said．‘Every night I try to open his bed room door．Up to now he's locked it．But one night he'll forget，and Then I'll kill him！’
　　‘Why do you hate him so much？’I asked．
　　‘Because he's taken everything from me！’he shouted angrily．‘There's nothing left for Hareton to inherit！But I'm going to get it all back！and his money too，and then his blood．Then the devil can have his soul！’
　　He seemed mad to me，Ellen．I left him，and went to find the old servant，Joseph．It seemed that Heathcliff's room was locked，and there were no guest bedrooms，so in the end I slept on a chair in the child's room．What a welcome to my new home！
　　I know Heathcliff blames Edgar forQCatherine's illness．He has warned me he'll make me suffer for it．Oh，I do hate him—I'm so miserable—I've been such a fool！Don't tell any one at Thrushcross Grange about this，Ellen．Come quickly—don't disappoint me！
　　Isabella
　　As soon as I had read this，I asked Mr Edgar if I could take a message from him to his sister．
　　‘You may visit her this afternoon，Ellen，if you like．Tell her I'm not angry，just sorry to have lost her．I can't imagine she will ever be happy．I shall never visit her or write to her．’
　　When I arrived at Wuthering Heights that afternoon，I was shocked to see how much worse the house looked than when I used to live there．I realized that Hindley did not care what conditions he lived in，and Joseph clearly spent more time praying than cleaning．Heathcliff and Isabella were both in the main room．Heathcliff looked more like a gentleman than I had ever seen him，but his wife had not bothered to brush her hair or change her dress．I had to explain to poor Isabella that Mr Edgar had refused to write to her．She cried a little when she heard that．Then Heathcliff asked me question after question about Catherine's illness．
　　‘If you really love her，’I told him，‘you'll keep away from her now．She mustn't be over-excited Her health will always be weak．And her loving husband is a very good nurse to her！’
　　‘Her loving husband！'repeated Heathcliff scornfully．‘Don't compare my feeling for her with his！No，Ellen，before you leave this house，I'll make you promise to arrange a meet- ing for me with Catherine．I must see her！’
　　‘I'll never agree to that，’I said．‘She's just beginning to recover．She's almost forgotten you，and now you want to upset her again！’ ‘Ellen，you know as well as I do that she can never forget me！If she thinks once of Edgar Linton，she thinks a thousand times of me！He can't love her as I can！And Catherine has a heart as deep as mine！’
　　‘Catherine and Edgar are very fond of each other！'said Isabella suddenly．‘Don't speak of my brother like that！’
　　‘Your dear brother doesn't care enough abut you to write to you，'replied Heathcliff，smiling sourly．
　　‘That's because be doesn't know how much I've suffered，'she answered quietly，turning away to hide the tears on her face．
　　‘Sir，’I said，‘it seems to me that Miss Isabella，Mrs Heathcliff，I should say，is unhappy．You must treat her kindly．Try to look after her．Let her have a maid，for example．’
　　‘I'm not going to be soft with her，’he repliedd with a laugh．‘She was stupid enough to run away with me．I never pretended to love her．Now I think she's beginning to realize that I scorn her．She's an even weaker fool than her brother， but she's going to be useful to me．That's why I'm keeping her with me．’ ‘Ellen，he says he married me to have his revenge on Edgar！But I won't let him carry out his plan，whatever it is． I'll die，or I'll see him dead first！’
　　‘You're getting violent，Isabella！'said Heathcliff．‘Go up- stairs now．I want to speak to Ellen Dean in private．Go on！’ And he pushed her roughly out of the door． ‘Don't you feel pity for her？’I asked，when we were alone．‘Have you ever felt pity for anybody in your life？’ ‘Why should I？She's just like an insect under my foot．The more she cries，the more I enjoy hurting her．Now，Ellen，lis-ten．I'll wait every day and every evening in the Grange gar- den，until I find a chance to see Catherine．If I meet Edgar Linton or his servants，I'll shoot them．But don't you think it’d be better to avoid a fight？You could tell me when she'll be alone．Then there'll be no violence．’
　　I argued and complained，and refused fifty times，but in the end he forced me to agree．I promised to let him know when Edgar Linton was away from home．I suppose it was wrong of me，but I hoped it would be Heathcliff's last meeting with Catherine．






■ 10 Heathcliff visits Catherine for the last time
　　1784 Heathcliff had given me a letter for Catherine，but I decided not to show it to her until Mr Edgar was out of the house．My chance came four days after my visit to Wuthering Heights．As it was a Sunday，Mr Edgar and all the servants went to church，leaving me alone to look after Catherine．
　　She was sitting downstairs，by an open window，enjoying the spring sunshine．Her appearance had changed since her illness，but there was a strange beauty in her pale face．She did not read or sew any more，but used to sit there silently， staring into the distance．Her eyes seemed fixed on something far away，something beyond normal sight．
　　I showed her the letter，but she looked confused and could not seem to understand it，so I had to explain ‘It's from Mr Heathcliff，’I said gently．‘He's in the garden，and wants to see you．What shall I tell him？’
　　She said nothing，but bent forward in her chair to listen． We both heard someone coming through the hall．Heathcliff had realized the house was almost empty，and had found an open door Catherine looked eagerly towards the entrance to the room． He appeared，and in two steps was by her side．For five whole minutes he held her in his arms and kissed her again and again it gave him great pain to look at her face．He could see，as I could，that she would never recover，that she was certain to die．
　　‘Oh，Catherine！Oh，my life！How can I bear It！’he cried．‘You and Edgar have broken my heart，'said Catherine， ‘And you both want me to pity yoy！How strong you are， Heathcliff！You'll live for years after my death！Will you forget me，and be happy with others，when I'm in my grave？’‘It's wicked of you to say that，Catherine．You know your words will burn for ever in my memory after you've left me． You know I could never forget you！’
　　‘I don't want you to suffer more than I do，Heathcliff．I only want us to be together，always ．’
　　Heathcliff turned away，his shoulders shaking． ‘That isn't my Heathcliff，’Catherine said to me．‘I'll always love my Heathcliff，and take him with me．He's in my soul，you see．Oh，Ellen，I do want to escape from this prison．There's a beautiful world waiting for me out there．You feel sorry for me now because I'm ill．Well，very soon I'll feel sorry for you，because I'll be beyond you all！’
　　Heathcliff turned towards her，his fierce eyes wet．For a moment they looked at each other，and then they were in each other's arms again． No one could have separated them．
　　‘How cruel you've been to me，Catherine！’he cried wildly． ‘You loved me，so why did you marry Edgar Linton？It's all your fault！I haven't broken your heart，you've broken it！ 108 And you've broken mine too！Do you think I want to live after you are dead？’ ‘If I've done wrong，I'm dying for it！'sobbed Catherine． ‘It's your fault too，Heathcliff！You left me，remember？But I forgive you．Now forgive me！’
　　It's hard to forgive，when I look at your sad eyes，and feel your thin hands．Kiss me again，Catherine！I forgive you for making me suffer，but how can I forgive you for dying？’
　　Catherine sobbed quietly，hiding her face in his shoulder， and tears rolled down Heathcliff's dark face．
　　Suddenly I noticed，through the window，the servants coming back from church．I was afraid Mr Edgar would find Heathcliff with Catherine．
　　‘My master will be here in a moment，’I warned them． ‘I must go，Catherine，'said Heathcliff． ‘No，no！'she screamed．Den't go！It's the last time！ Edgar won't hurt us！Heathcliff，I'll die if you go！’‘All right，my darling，I'll stay．If he shot me in your arms，I’d die happy．’
　　At that moment my master appeared at the door．When he saw Heathcliff holding his wife，he went pale with anger．
　　‘Here，take care of her first，'said Heathcliff，putting Catherine in her husband's arms，‘then speak to me later if you wish．’ He walked out of the house．
　　Catherine seemed to be unconscious，and Mr Edgar was so worried about her that he forgot about Heathcliff for the moment．She recovered a little，but did not recognize any of us，and was clearly very ill．We put her to bed immediately， and at twelve o’clock that night her daughter，Cathy，was born，two months early．That's the young lady you saw at Wuthering Heights，Mr Lockwood．Two hours later， Catherine died，without calling for Heathcliff，or recognizing Edgar．My poor master was in the depths of despair．I thought it was very unfortunate that Catherine had only given him a daughter，not a son．Now the Linton fortune would pass to Isabella and her husband after Mr Edgar's death．
　　Catherine's dead body lay peacefully on her bed．In death she looked more beautiful that in life．I wondered if she was now beyond us all，’as she had said，and hoped that her soul had found a home with God．
　　In the morning I went to look for Heathcliff．I found him in the Grange garden，where he had been waiting for news all night． ‘She's dead，I know！’he caned to me as I came closer．
　　‘Don't cry，she doesn't need your tears！Tell me-tell me， how did-？’He tried to say her name，but could not manage it．‘How did she die？’he said at last，staring fiercely at me． ‘Don't be sorry for me，I don't want your pity！’ ‘Poor creature！’I thought．‘You have a heart just like other men，but you are too proud to show it！’
　　Aloud I said，‘She died quietly，in her sleep．Her life finished in a gentle dream．I hope she wakes as calmly in the other world！’ ‘Where are you，Catherine？’he cried in despair．‘Don't leave me here，where I can't find you！I pray that you will never rest while I'm alive．You said I killed you-haunt me then！Murdered people do haunt their murderers，I believe． Come back as a ghost-drive me mad-I don't care！Oh， God！I can't bear it！I cannot live without you，my soul！’
　　He howled like a wild animal，and hit his forehead several times against a tree，until the wood．was covered in blood．I knew I could no longer help him，so I left him．
　　Catherine was buried the following Friday．Her brother Hindley，although invited，did not come，and Isabella was not invited，so it was only Mr Edgar and the servants who attended the ceremony． To our surprise，she was not buried in the church with the Lintons，nor with the Earnshaws．She lies in an open corner of the churchyard，where she can breather the air from the moors．Her husband's grave is next to hers．






■ 11 Isabella escapes
　　1784 That Friday evening the wind changed，and brought first rain，then snow．Next morning the spring flowers were all hidden under deep snow．Mr Edgar stayed in his room．I was in the sitting-room with the baby，when I was surprised to hear a girl's voice behind me．I turned round，and saw it was Isabella Heathcliff．I was quite shocked by her appearance．Her hair was loose，and wet with snow and rain． She wore a light silk dress and thin shoes，which did not seem at all suitable for a long walk in the snow．Under her ear was a deep wound，which was bleeding．Her face was scratched and bruised，and she looked very tired．I could see that she was expecting a baby．
　　‘I've run all the way here from Wuthering Heights，'she said，gasping for breath．‘I couldn't count how many times I've fallen down！Ellen，please ask a maid to find some dry clothes for me，and then I'll go on to the village．I'm not stay- ing here．’ ‘First，my dear young lady，’I told her，‘you'll get warm and dry，and I'll put a bandage on that wound．Then we'll have some tea．’She was so exhausted that she let me help her without protesting，and finally we sat down together near the fire with our cups of tea．
　　‘Oh，Ellen，'she said，‘I cried bitterly when I heard of Catherine's death，you know And Heathcliff is desperately sad！But I can't feel sorry for him．This is the last thing of his I've got，’and she took off her gold wedding-ring and threw it in the fire．‘I'll never go back to him．But I can't stay here， in case he comes to find me．And anyway I don't want to beg for Edgar's help，or make trouble for him．To escape from Heathcliff I must go a long way away．How could Catherine have liked him，Ellen？I wish he would die，and then I could forget him completely！’ ‘Don't say that，’I protested，‘he's a human being．There are worse men than him in the world！’ ‘He isn't human，'she replied．‘I gave him my heart，and he destroyed it，so I can't feel pity for him．But I must tell you how I managed to escape．Hindley Earnshaw should have been at Catherine's burial yesterday，but he had been drinking so much that he couldn't go．Last night he and I were sitting silently in the kitchen at about midnight，when Heathcliff came home．Hindley decided to lock the doors so that Heath- cliff could not get in．He told me his plan was to murder his hated guest that night，with the weapon he had shown me．I hate Heathcliff too，but I could not agree to murder，so I called out a warning from the kitchen window．Heathcliff swore horribly at me and broke one of the windows．Hindley put his right arm out through the hole，with the gun in it，and aimed it at his enemy．But before he could fire，Heathcliff caught hold of the gun and pulled it away from Hindley．The knife cut into Hindley's wrist，and blood poured out．Heath- cliff jumped into the kitchen through the window，and started kicking and hitting Hindley．who was lying unconscious on the kitchen floor． ‘I ran off to find Joseph．When we came back，Heathcliff was putting a bandage on Hindley's wrist．Joseph was shocked at the sight of his master，and would have gone to the police， if Heathcliff hadn't forced me to describe what happened．I had to agree that Hindley had certainly attacked Heathcliff first． ‘The next day，I decided to have my revenge on Heathcliff， by telling Hindley that‘that devil’had hit and kicked him when he was unconscious．And I told Heathcliff to his face that he could never have made Catherine happy，if she had been his wife．This made him so angry that he threw a knife at me，which cut my neck，and then he rushed towards me， swearing violently．I knew I had to get away quickly，and as I ran out of the kitchen，I saw Hindley attack Heathcliff Both of them were rolling on the floor，fighting．I came over the moors through the snow to the Grange．At last I'm free！And I shall never，never spend another night at Wuthering Heights．’
　　After drinking her tea，Isabella left the Grange From our village she travelled by coach to the south，where she made her new home near London．There，a few months later，she had a son．She called him Linton．
　　Heathcliff must have discovered this from the servants．One day when I saw him in the village，he said，‘I hear I've got a son，Ellen，whose name's Linton！I suppose Isabella wants me to hate him！She can keep him for the moment．But tell Edgar Linton I'll have the boy one day！He's mine！’
　　After Catherine's death my poor master，Mr Edgar，was a changed man．He no longer went to church，or saw any friends．He occasionally went for lonely walks on the moors， and regularly visited his wife's grave．But fortunately Catherine had left him something of herself，her daughter Cathy．This tiny child soon won his heart．
　　It's strange，Mr Lockwood，to compare Hindley and Edgar．They both lost their wives，and were left with a child． Hindley did not believe in God，and showed no interest in his son Hareton．But Edgar believed，and loved his daughter Cathy deeply．
　　Hindley himself died six months after his sister Catherine． We never discovered exactly what happened，but Heathcliff said he had drunk himself to death．It appeared that Heathcliff had won Hindley's house，land and money from him when playing cards，so he was now the master of Wuthering Heights．Hareton inherited nothing from his father，and could only stay on at Wuthering Heights as a servant，working for the man who had been his father's enemy．






■ 12 Bringing up Cathy
　　1797 During the next twelve years I was happier than I had ever been before．All my time was spent looking after little Cathy，who brought sunshine into our lives．She was a real beauty，with the Earnshaws’ dark eyes and the Lintons’fair skin．She wasn't as proud and quick-tempered as her mother，but she was used to getting what she wanted． Her father loved her so much that he gave her everything，and never scolded her．
　　Until she was thirteen she had never been outside the Grange garden alone．She knew nothing of Wuthering Heights or Heathcliff．She often asked me about the hills in the distance，beyond the moors，and wanted to ride her pony there．I knew the master would not let her leave the safety of the Grange to go so far，especially as the road to the hills passed close to Wuthering Heights．So I always told her she would be able to go there when she was older．I did not know what she was planning．
　　Mr Edgar received a letter from his sister Isabella．She wrote that she was dying of a fever，and asked him to visit her for the first and last time．She also wanted him to take care of her son Linton after her death．Although my master hated travelling，he did not hesitate to do as she requested．He told me to look after Cathy carefully，and left at once．
　　He was away for three weeks．Cathy did not cause me any trouble at first．She spent her days walking her dogs and riding her pony in the large garden．But one day she asked if she could stay out the whole day，and away she went on her little pony，with her two dogs running behind．
　　There was no sign of her at tea-time，and I began to be seriously worried．I went outside to look for her．At the gate I found a workman，who had seen-her jump the low wall separating the garden from the road，and then ride on towards the hills and Wuthering Heights．
　　I was very frightened now．She could be lost on the moors！ She could have tried to climb the hills，and fallen！I walked across the moors as fast as I could，and arrived breathless at Wuthering Heights．How glad I was to see one of her dogs lying outside the kitchen door！I knocked loudly，and Zillah let me in．I knew she had been the housekeeper there since Hindley's death． ‘Ah，'she said，‘you've come for your little mistress！She's here，quite safe！The master，Mr Heathcliff，isn't here．He won't be back for a while．’
　　Cathy was sitting comfortably in the kitchen，talking eagerly to Hareton．He was now a big，strong young man of eighteen，who was staring rather stupidly at her．I was delighted to find her again，but I pretended to be angry to punish her． ‘Well，miss！You are wicked，going such a long way all alone！I've been all over the moors looking for you！looking father will be angry！’ ‘What have I done？'she sobbed，suddenly frightened． ‘Father didn't forbid me to leave the Grange garden！He won't scold me，Ellen．He's never cross，like you！And I've been to the hills，Ellen！This-man-showed me，because I didn't know the way．’
　　I made her put on her hat and prepare to leave． ‘Whose house is this？'she asked suddenly．‘It's your father's，isn't it？'she added，turming to Hareton． ‘No，’he replied，looking down．His face went very red．
　　‘Whose then-your master's？'she asked．
　　He swore，and turned away． “Ellen，he didn't say miss to me．Servants should always say ‘miss’，shouldn't they？”
　　Hareton frowned and looked very angry，but said nothing． ‘You，get my horse，'she ordered him ‘Hurry！’ ‘What the devil do you mean？I'm not your servant！’he growled． ‘You see，Miss Cathy？Nice words to be used to a young lady！Now come along，let's fetch the pony and leave，’I said． ‘But Ellen，'she cried，staring horrified at him，‘how dare he speak to me like that！He must do as I tell him！’
　　He's not your servant，miss，'said Zillah，who had been listening to the conversation．‘He's your cousin．’ ‘He can't be my cousin！’cried Cathy，with a scornful laugh．‘Father has gone to fetch my cousin from London．He's a gentleman's son，not-not a farm worker like him！’She pointed at poor Hareton，whose clothes were old and dirty．
　　I was very annoyed with her and Zillah．Now Heathcliff would hear about his son's arrival，which we had hoped to keep secret from him．And Cathy would certainly ask her father whether she had a cousin at Wuthering Heights．On our way home I explained to her that if her father discovered she had visited Wuthering Heights，he would perhaps be so angry with me that he would send me away．She could not bear to think of that，so she promised to keep her visit a secret from him．
　　We heard from Mr Edgar that his sister had died，and that he was returning soon with his young nephew．Cathy was wild with excitement．She would see her dear father again，and have a cousin of the same age to play with．
　　But when the coach arrived，young Linton had to be carried into the house．He was a pale，thin boy，who looked very like Mr Edgar．He seemed so weak that I wondered how long he would live．I thought he would have no chance of life if his father Heathcliff took him to live at Wuthering Heights．
　　In fact Linton only stayed one night with us．Later that evening Heathcliff's servant Joseph arrived and asked to speak to the master．Although it was late and Mr Edgar was tired after his journey，Joseph insisted，so I took him to the master's room． ‘Heathcliff has sent me for his son，and I can't go back without him，’he said．
　　Mr Edgar was silent for a moment．On his face was an expression of deep sadness．He had hoped to keep Linton with him，as Isabella had wished．But he could not refuse the boy's father． ‘Tell Mr Heathcliff，’he said calmly，‘that Ellen will take his son to Wuthering Heights tomorrow．He‘s asleep at the moment，and I won't disturb him．’
　　‘No！'said Joseph，banging the table with his hand．‘I must take him back now！’
　　‘Not tonight！’answered Mr Edgar．‘Leave the house now，and tell your master what I said！’ ‘Very well！'shouted Joseph，as he walked out．‘If he doesn't arrive early in the morning，Heathcliff will come for him！’






■ 13 Heathcliff's son at Wuthering Heights
　　1797 Linton was very surprised to be woken so early，and told that he had another journey to make，before break fast．As we rode the four miles to Wuthering Heights，he kept asking me questions abut his new home，and the father he had never seen．When we arrived，Heathcliff，Hareton，and Joseph all came out of the house to inspect the child．
　　‘Master，that's not a boy，'said Joseph after a while ． ‘Look at that white skin and fair hair！Mr Edgar's sent you his daughter instead！’ ‘God！What a beautiful creature！’laughed Heathcliff scornfully．‘That's worse than I expected！’
　　I helped the trembling child off the horse and into the house．Heathcliff took him roughly by the arm．
　　‘I hope you'll be kind to him，Mr Heathcliff，’I said．‘He's weak，and ill．And he's all the family you've go！’
　　‘Don't worry，’Ellen，'replied Heathcliff with a smile．‘As Isabella's son he'll inherit Thrushcross Grange one day，and I don't want him to die before that He'll be educated as a gentleman．But I'm bitterly disappointed at having such a weak，crying baby for a son！’
　　So poor Linton was left in his father's care．At first Cathy was miserable，because she would not now have anyone to play with，but she soon forgot him．Whenever I met Zillah，the housekeeper，in the village，I used to ask her abut Linton． ‘He's often ill，'she told me．‘And so selfish！He has to have a fire even in summer！He calls for cakes and hot drinks all the time．He only ever thinks of himself．Mr Heathcliff can't bear being in the same room as him！’
　　Several years passed without any more news of Linton．In 1800 Cathy reached the age of sixteen．We never celebrated her birthday，because it was also the day her mother died．On this particular day she came downstairs，dressed for going out，and suggested a walk on the moors with me．Her father gave permission．
　　It was a lovely spring morning，and I was very happy walking in the sunshine，watching Cathy running ahead of me．But we had walked further than I had realized，and I called to her to come back．She did not seem to hear me． We were on the moors，close to Wuthering Heights，when I caught sight of two men talking to her．I recognized Heathcliff and Hareton at once．I hurried to catch up with her． ‘Miss Cathy，’I said breathlessly，‘we must go home． Your father will be getting worried． ‘No，he won't，Ellen．This gentleman wants me to go to his house and meet his son．He says we've already met，but I don't remember，do you？Let's go，Ellen！’
　　Although I protested，she and Hareton were already halfway to Wuthering Heights．Heathcliff and I followed behind． ‘It's very bad of you，Mr Heathcliff，’I scolded him．‘Mr Edgar will blame me for letting her go to your house．’ ‘I want her to see Linton，Ellke， he re…led．‘Listen to my plan．It's really a very generous one．I want the two cousins to fall in love and marry．You know Cathy won't inherit anything from her father．My son Linton will inherit all the Linton fortune when Edgar dies．If she marries Linton， she'll be wealthy．Of course，if Linton dies，then the money comes to me，as his only other relation．’
　　I was still angry with Heathcliff，but it was too late to stop Cathy entering Wuthering Heights．She was delighted to rediscover her cousin Linton，who was keeping warm by the fire． ‘If he is my cousin，and you are his father，'she said to Heathcliff，smiling，‘then you must be my uncle！Why don't you ever visit us at the Grange？’ ‘I visited it once or twice too often before you were born，’ he said．‘I must tell you that I quarrelled violently with your father once．He hates me，and if you tell him you want to come here，he'll forbid it．’
　　‘Well， if I can't come here， Linton can come to visit me at the Grange， suggested Cathy happily．
　　‘It'll be too far for me，’ said her cousin weakly．‘It would kill me to walk four miles．’
　　Heathcliff looked scornfully at his son．
　　‘I don't think my plan will ever succeed， Ellen！’he whispered to me．‘Who would fall in love with a selfish baby 138like that？’ He went to the kitchen door and called，‘Hareton！Come and take Miss Cathy round the farm ．’Cathy was eager to see the animals， and she and Hareton went out．
　　As we watched them through the kitchen window，Heathcliff seemed to be thinking aloud．
　　‘I've taken my revenge on his father， by making Hareton work for me． I treat him badly， as they used to do to me， and he suffers， as I used to． He's intelligent， and strong， and handsome， but I've taught him to scorn those qualities ．So now he's just an uneducated farm worker，and knows nothing of the world．That's how he'll always be．And my son？He's stupid，and weak，and ill．But he's gentleman，and he'll mar- ry Cathy，and he'll be rich！’
　　Meanwhile Linton had got up from his armchair and gone out to join Cathy and Hareton．Through the open window I could hear the two younger ones laughing at Hareton's coarse way of speaking．I began to disliker Linton rather than pity him．
　　When we arrived back at the Grange，Cathy told her fathter about the visit．He did not want to frighten her，and，in my opinion，did not explain clearly enough why she should never communicate with Linton again．At the time she seemed to accept her father's wish．
　　During the next few weeks，however，I noticed Cathy's behaviour change．She was always writing on little pieces of paper，which she kept in a locked drawer in her room，and every morning she got up surprisingly early to go down to the kitchen．I suspected something，and day I decided to break open her drawer．In it I was horrified to find a whole pile of love letters from Linton．The two cousins had been writing to each other in secret for several weeks，and Cathy had used the milkman as a messenger．I told her at once that I knew her secret，and made her promise not to send or receive any more letters．We burnt Linton's letters together．






■ 14 Secret visits
　　1800 The months passed，and soon it was autumn．Mr Edgar caught a bad cold，which seemed to get worse and worse．He stayed indoors the whole winter，so Cathy only had me as a companion on her walks．She had become very quiet and sad since her relationship with Linton had ended，and was very worried about her father's illness．One day when we were walking in the Grange garden，I noticed her crying． ‘Cathy，what's the matter，love？’I ashed． “Oh，Ellen，'she sobbed，‘what shall I do if Father dies？ And if you die？I'll be left alone！’ ‘I hope he and I have years more of life ahead of us．All you need do is look after your father，and let him see you're cheerful．But I think he would be really ill if he thought you loved Linton，whose father would like to see Mr Edgar dead．’
　　I'll never，never do anything to worry or annoy Father，'she promised．‘I only want him to recover．I love him more than anyone else in the world，more than myself！’
　　Just then we reached the gate，and I saw a gentleman on a horse looking over it．It was Heathcliff． ‘Miss Linton！’he called．There's something I must tell you！’
　　‘I won't listen，answered Cathy．‘Father and Ellen both say you're a wicked man．’
　　‘But this is about my son Linton，not me．What a trick you played on him！You wrote him all those love letters，and then I suppose you got tired of it，and stopped！well，you've broken poor Linton's heart．I swear，he's dying of love for you，and he'll be in the grave by next summer unless you help him！Be generous，come and visit him．I'll be away all next week，so your father won't be angry if you come．’
　　He rode away．Although I tried to persuade Cathy that Heathcliff could not be telling the truth，my young mistress was very upset，and determined to discover how Linton was．
　　The next morning we rode to Wuthering Heights．We found Linton alone，lying on a sofa．He looked feverish and ill，and had a bad cough． ‘Will you shut the door？’he said crossly，as we entered． ‘It's so cold！No，Cathy，I can't breathe if you kiss me！I want a drink．’
　　Cathy poured him a glass of water．
　　And are you glad to see me，Linton？'she asked hopefully． ‘Yes，I am，’he replied．‘But you should have come before！My father swore at me，and said it was my fault you didn't come．Will you come and visit me again？’ ‘Yes，Linton，’Cathy said gently，holding his hand．‘If Father agreed，I’d spend half my time with you．I wish you were my brother，then we could spend all our time together！’ ‘But my father says you would love me best if you were my wife，so that would be better．’
　　‘I’d never love anybody more than Father，'she replied seriously．‘Sometimes men hate their wives，like your father． He hated your mother，my aunt Isabella．That's why she left him．’ ‘That's not true！’cried the boy．‘Anyway，your mother hated your father！And she loved mine！’ ‘You're lying！I hate you！'she shouted angrily，and gave the sofa a violent push．He fell back，and started coughing so badly that even I was frightened．At last he recovered．Cathy was crying in a comer，afraid that she had really hurt him．
　　‘How do you feel now，Linton？'she asked after a while． ‘I'm sorry，I didn't mean to hurt you．’ ‘I wish you felt as ill as I do，you cruel thing！And I was better today，before you came！’His voice was full of pity for himself．
　　‘We must go，’I said．‘You can soe，Miss Cathy，that he isn't dying of love for you！It's not your fault that he's ill． Come along！’But I could not stop Cathy whispering some- thing in Linton's ear，before we left the room．
　　On the way home I told her I would not allow her to visit him again． ‘He's a selfish child，Miss Cathy，and I don't think he'll live till he's twenty．I'm glad you're not going to marry him．’
　　Cathy looked sad．‘I'm sure he’d recover if I looked after him．And I don't think we’d quarrel if we knew each other better．’ 148 ‘Well，miss，if you try to go there again，with or without me，I'll tell your father．’
　　But the next day I fell ill，and had to stay in bed for three weeks，which was very unusual for me．My little mistress went from her father's bedroom to mine，and back again，and looked after us both with the greatest care．But I never wondered what she did in the evenings，when Mr Edgar had gone to bed，and I no longer needed her．
　　I only discovered the truth on the first day I was able to get up．In the evening I asked her to read to me，and was surprised how sleepy she seemed．She went to bed early．I felt rather worried about her health，and went to her room an hour later to see if she needed anything．Her bedroom was empty．I sat there in the dark，waiting for her to return．
　　when she arrived，shaking the snow off her shoes，she was shocked to find me there．I guessed where she had been，but I made her tell me the whole story．Every night since I had been ill，she had ridden to Wuthering Heights and spent the evening with her cousin．Sometimes she was happy with Linton，when he was cheerful and less selfish，but most of the time she was miserable．However，she insisted that the visits should continue，because Linton needed her，and she wanted to see him．
　　Although she begged me to say nothing to her father，I went straight to the master and told him．He forbade her to visit Wuthering Heights again．She had to obey her father， although it made her very sad．
　　Well，Mr Lockwood，all this happened only about a year ago．I never thought I would be telling a stranger this story！But who knows how long you'll be a stranger？You're too，young to live alone for long，and no one could see Cathy and not love her．Anyway，I'll continue my story．






■ 15 A trap
　　1800 A few days after the master had forbidden Cathy to visit Linton，he asked my opinion of the boy．
　　‘Tell me honestly，Ellen，what do you think of his character？’
　　‘Well，sir，I don't think he's wicked，like his father．But you'll have plenty of time to get to know him，sir．He's too young to marry yet．’
　　Mr Edgar walked to the window and looked out．It was a misty February evening，but the churchyard was just visible．
　　‘I've often prayed for death，Ellen．I've been very happy with my little Cathy．But I've been just as happy lying，through the long June evenings，on her mother's grave，and looking forward to the moment when I can join Catherine there！I haven't got much time left，Ellen．What can I do for Cathy before I die？Should she marry Linton？I wouldn't mind him being Heathcliff's son，if only he loved her and could be a good husband to her．’
　　‘God will show us what to do，sir，’I replied．
　　In the spring Mr Edgar was still ill，and he continued to worry about Cathy's future．One day he wrote to Linton inviting him to visit the Grange．Linton wrote a long letter back，explaining that his father would not allow him to do that．He begged his uncle to let him meet Cathy for a walk or a ride on the moors between the Grange and Wuthering Heights，as they could not meet in either house．Mr Edgar refused at first，and Linton sent him several more letters．I am sure they had all been carefully checked by Heathcliff before they were posted．
　　Finally Mr Edgar agreed．He hoped that，if Cathy married Linton，who would inherit the Linton fortune，she would at least be able to remain in her family home．He had no idea that Linton was seriously ill．Neither did I．I never imagined that a father could treat a dying child as cruelly and wickedly as we later discovered Heathcliff had done．
　　It was a hot，sunny day in summer when Cathy and I rode out to meet her cousin．We were both shocked to discover that he could neither ride nor walk，and was lying on the grass，waiting for us．He looked even paler and weaker than the last time I had seen him．During our meeting he did not seem interested in Cathy or her news．Cathy noticed this immediately．
　　‘Well，Linton，'she said after a while，‘you don't want to talk to me，so I think I'll go home．’
　　‘No，no！’he cried，getting quite excited．‘Not yet！Stay—at least another half-hour！My father will be angry with me if you leave early！’
　　‘I suppose we can stay a few minutes longer，'said Cathy．
　　We waited，talking to each other quietly while Linton slept a little．Sometimes he cried out in pain． ‘Do you think his health is better now than before？’whispered Cathy．
　　‘I'm sorry，Miss Cathy，I think it's much worse，’I answered．
　　Cathy called her pony，and the sound woke Linton up．
　　‘If you see my father，’he said，hesitating，‘could you tell him I've been cheerful？He'll be here soon！’And he looked round in terror．
　　‘I'll be here next Thursday！’cried Cathy，as she jumped on her pony．‘Come on，Ellen！’
　　In the week that followed，Mr Edgar's illness grew worse every day．Cathy could not avoid realizing how serious it was，and sat by his bedside day and night，looking sad and pale．Her father's room had become her whole world．On Thursday I thought a ride in the fresh air would be good for her，and Mr Edgar gladly gave her permission to see Linton．He was hoping that she would not be left alone after his death．I did not want to worry him in his last moments，so I did not tell him that Linton was also dying．
　　We rode on to the moors and found Linton lying in the same place as before．He was looking very frightened．
　　‘I thought you weren't going to come！’he said．
　　‘Why won't you be honest？’cried Cathy at once．‘Why have you brought me here again，if you don't want to see me？My father's very ill and I should be with him．’
　　Tears rolled down Linton's face．He seemed terrified．
　　‘Oh，I can't bear it！’he sobbed．‘Cathy，I daren't explain！But if you leave me，he'll kill me！Dear Cathy，my life is in your hands！Kind，sweet Cathy，perhaps you will agree，and then he won't hurt me！’
　　Cathy was no longer impatient．‘Agree to what，Linton？'she asked gently．‘Tell me everything！You wouldn't do anything to hurt me，would you，Linton？I'm your best friend．’
　　‘I daren't tell you！My father—'the boy gasped．Just then Heathcliff appeared．He did not look at Cathy and Linton，who continued talking to each other，but he spoke quietly to me．
　　‘Ellen，how is Edgar？Is he dying，as the villagers say？’
　　‘It's true，the master is dying，’I answered．
　　‘That boy over there is dying too．I only hope Edgar dies before him．If Linton dies first，my plan will fail．’He shouted angrily to his son，‘Get up，Linton！’and then said politely to Cathy，‘Miss Cathy，would you help him back to the house．He can't walk far alone．’
　　‘Father has forbidden me to enter your house，'said Cathy．
　　‘Well，come along，Linton．I'll have to take you home then，'said Heathcliff．
　　‘No！No！No！Please，Cathy！You must come with me！'screamed Linton wildly．He held desperately on to her arm．
　　Cathy could not refuse the boy，who seemed almost mad with fear．So we all walked the few steps to Wuthering Heights．When we had entered the house，however，I was horrified to see Heathcliff lock the front door．The key was in his hand．
　　‘Hareton，Joseph and Zillah are all out of the house，’he said calmly，‘so we are quite alone．’
　　‘Give me that key！’cried Cathy angrily．‘I'm not afraid of you！’She took hold of his closed hand and bit it．He hit her violently several times，on both sides of the head，and she fell into a chair，trembling．I rushed at him，but he pushed me away．
　　‘Cry as much as you like，Miss Cathy，’he said．‘In a few days I'll be your father，and I'll punish you just like that，as often as necessary！’
　　When Heathcliff went out to look for our horses，Cathy and I hurried round the kitchen looking for a way to escape．But all the doors and windows were locked．Linton was sitting calmly in a chair near the fire，happy that he was not being punished this time．We persuaded him to explain his father's plan to us．
　　‘Father is afraid I'll die soon，you see，so he wants us to be married tomorrow morning．You'll have to stay here all night，Cathy．Then perhaps he'll let you go home in the morning．’
　　‘You marry this beautiful，healthy young lady？’I cried．‘You must be mad！And wicked too！You and your father have tricked us into coming here！’And I shook him until he started coughing．
　　‘I must go home now．Father will be worried already，'said Cathy．‘I love Father better than you，Linton！’
　　Heathcliff returned and sent his son upstairs to bed．
　　‘Mr Heathcliff，’begged Cathy，‘Father will be miserable if I don't go home．Please let me go．I promise to marry Linton．Father would like it，and I love him．Why do you force me to do something I want to do？’
　　‘He can't force you！’I cried．‘I'll go to the police！’
　　‘To the devil with you，Ellen！Miss Cathy，I'm delighted that your father will be miserable．In that case you will certainly stay here for twenty-four hours．You won't leave here until you've kept your promise to marry Linton．’
　　‘Please send Ellen to let Father know I'm safe！'sobbed Cathy bitterly．‘Poor Father！He'll think we're lost！’
　　‘Your father must have hated you when you came into the world（I did，at least），and he'll hate you as he leaves it．Go on crying．That's what you'll be doing when you're Linton's wife．He'll make a cruel，selfish husband，I think．’
　　Heathcliff took us upstairs to Zillah's room，where we spent the night，locked in．Neither of us could sleep．At seven the following morning he came to fetch Cathy，and took her away．From that moment I saw nobody except Hareton，who brought me food，for four whole days and nights．
　　On the fifth morning Zillah came into the room．She was surprised and pleased to see me，and told me the villagers all thought Cathy and I had got lost on the moors，and died，four days ago．I ran out of the room to look for Cathy．
　　The big kitchen was full of sunshine，and the door was open，but the only person there was Linton．
　　‘Where is she？Where is Miss Cathy？’I cried wildly．
　　‘Upstairs，in a locked room，’he replied calmly，eating a piece of sugar．‘We won't let her go yet．Father says I shouldn't he soft with Cathy．We've had the wedding ceremony，so she's my wife now，and must stay with me．I don't care if she cries，or is ill！’
　　‘Have you forgotten her kindness to you last winter，when you wrote that you loved her，and she used to come through wind and snow to see you？Now you believe your father's lies about her！And you leave her alone，ill and crying in a strange house！You pity yourself，but you won't pity her！What a heartless，selfish boy you are！’
　　‘I can't stay with her！She cries so much I can't bear it！I can't sleep with all that noise．She promised that if I gave her the key to our room，she’d give me all her nice books，and her pony，but I told her she had nothing to give．They're all mine，or they'll belong to me very soon．And then she cried，and took a little gold case from around her neck．Inside were two pictures，one of her mother and one of her father．I wanted to take them both from her，but she wouldn't let me，so I screamed for help．My father came，and ordered her to give him the pictures and the case．When she refused，he—he hit her on the face and knocked her down，and broke the gold case under his foot．He took away the picture of her mother．’
　　‘And were you pleased to see Miss Cathy hurt？’I asked．
　　‘My father was right to punish her．But I didn't like seeing her mouth full of blood．She can't speak because of the pain．Now you've made me tired with all this talking！You won't find the key to the room！Go away！’
　　As there seemed to be no chance of persuading him to help her escape，I decided to go back to the Grange as quickly as possible，and rescue her later．
　　What a welcome I received from the servants at the Grange，who thought I was dead！But I did not have time to tell them my story．I went straight to my master's room．He was lying in bed，very weak and close to death．I told him how Heathcliff had trapped us，and that Cathy was probably mar ried to Linton by now．Mr Edgar realized that his enemy wanted to get hold of the Linton fortune，through his son．He asked me to send for his lawyer，to make arrangements so that Cathy would not lose all her inheritance．
　　I did as he asked，but the lawyer sent a message，saying that he could not come until the next day．I also sent four strong men with weapons to Wuthering Heights，to demand my young lady's freedom．I was very angry when they returned without her，because Heathcliff had sent them away．
　　But I needn't have worried．In the middle of the night，as I was taking some water to the master，I heard a knock on the front door，and went to open it．It was my little mistress！
　　‘Ellen，Ellen！'she sobbed．‘Is Father still alive？’
　　‘Yes，’I cried，‘and thank God you're safe with us again！’
　　‘I managed to make Linton help me escape from the room！Now I must see Father！’
　　I could not bear to be present at their meeting．I waited outside the bedroom door．But they were both calm．Cathy's despair was as silent as her father's happiness．He died in perfect peace，Mr Lockwood．Kissing her，he whispered，‘I'm going to join her，and you，dear child，will join us！’He did not move or speak again．
　　Cathy did not cry，but sat silently by his dead body all morning．At lunch-time the lawyer arrived，too late to help Cathy．Heathcliff had bribed him to stay away．He gave us Heathcliff's orders．All the servants except me had to leave．Cathy，Mrs Heathcliff now，was only allowed to stay at the Grange until her father was buried．






■ 16 Cathy becomes a widow
　　1800—1 On the evening after the burial，Heathcliff came to fetch Cathy．
　　‘Why not let her stay here with me？’I begged．
　　‘I'm looking for someone to rent the Grange from me，’he answered．‘You'll stay on here as housekeeper，Ellen，but Cathy must come to Wuthering Heights．From now on she'll have to work for her food．’
　　‘I shall work，'replied Cathy．‘And I'll look after Linton．He's all I've got to love in the world．I'm just sorry for you，Mr Heathcliff．You have nobody to love you！You are as lonely and miserable as the devil！Nobody will cry for you when you die！I'm glad I'm not you！’
　　‘Go and get your clothes，you wicked girl，’he said．‘We'll be leaving in a few minutes．’When she had gone，he walked across the room to look at the picture of Cathy's mother，Catherine，which was hanging on the wall．
　　‘Do you know what I did yesterday，Ellen？’he said，turning quickly away from the picture．‘I went to the churchyard，and asked the man who was digging Edgar's grave to open the lid of Catherine's coffin for me．Her face looked just the same！I could not stop looking at her．When the man closed the lid，I broke open one side of her coffin，the side away from Edgar's grave，and covered it up with earth．And I bribed the man to bury me there when I die，next to her，and to take the side of my coffin away too，so that I shall have her in my arms，not Edgar！’
　　‘You were very wicked，Mr Heathcliff，to disturb the dead！’
　　‘I disturbed nobody，Ellen，and I feel much happier now．She is the one who has disturbed me．For eighteen years she has haunted me．You know I was wild，almost mad，after she died．For days I prayed for her ghost to return to me．On the day of her burial，I went to her grave in the evening．There was a bitter wind，and snow on the ground．I wanted so much to have her in my arms again！So I dug down through the loose earth to her coffin，and was about to pull the lid off，when I felt a warm breath on my face．She seemed to be with me，not in the earth，but close to me．I was so happy that she was with me again！I filled in the grave，and ran eagerly home to the Heights．I looked impatiently round for her．I could feel her but I could not see her！And since then，she has played plenty of tricks on me like that．When I sleep in her bedroom，I can hear her outside the window，or entering the room，or even breathing close to me，but when I open my eyes，I'm always disappointed．Slowly，slowly，she's killing me，with the ghost of a hope that's lasted eighteen years！’
　　He was talking almost to himself，so I did not answer．When Cathy came in，he stood up，ready to go．
　　‘Goodbye，Ellen！’whispered my dear little mistress．‘Come and visit me！’As she kissed me，her face felt as cold as ice．
　　‘Oh，no you won't，Ellen！'said Heathcliff．‘I'll send for you if I want you！’and together they left the Grange．
　　I haven't seen Cathy since then．Once I went to the Heights to visit her，but I was not allowed to see her．About six weeks ago I had a long conversation with Zillah，the housekeeper，who gave me news of Cathy．It appeared that，when she ar rived at the Heights，she did her best to look after her sick husband．He was obviously dying，although Heathcliff refused to call the doctor．Only a few weeks after her arrival，Linton died in the night，with only Cathy by his bedside．Heathcliff inherited all of Linton's，and what had been Cathy's，fortune，so Cathy is now very poor．
　　She must be very miserable，and very lonely，in that dark，unpleasant house．Heathcliff hates her，and Joseph and Zillah don't speak to her，because they think she's too proud．Poor Hareton would like to be friendly with her，but she scorns him because he's uneducated．I would like to leave my job here，rent a little cottage and ask Cathy to come and live with me，but Mr Heathcliff will never permit that．Of course，if she married again，she could leave that house，but I can't arrange that．






■ 17 Mr Lockwood visits Wuthering Heights again
　　1802 After hearing the end of Mrs Dean's story，I made my plans for the future．I decided I did not want to spend another winter at the Grange，and told her I would ride to the Heights to inform my landlord．She handed me a letter to give to Cathy Heathcliff．
　　When I arrived at the gate，Hareton met me and took me into the house．Cathy was there，preparing vegetables for lunch．She did not bother to greet me．
　　‘She may be beautiful，’I thought，‘but she's not very polite．’I passed by her chair，and cleverly dropped Mrs Dean's note in front of her，so that Hareton wouldn't see it．She，however，just said aloud，‘What's that？’
　　‘A letter from the housekeeper at the Grange，’I said，annoyed with her．She gasped，and tried to pick it up，but Hareton got there first．
　　‘Mr Heathcliff will want to look at this，’he said，putting it in his pocket．But when Cathy pretended to cry，Hareton could not bear to make her sad，and he threw the letter down on the table．She eagerly read every word，and asked me several questions about the people at the Grange．
　　‘Mrs Dean will want an answer to her letter，’I reminded her．
　　‘You must tell her that I have no paper or pens to write with．I haven't even any books！'she answered sadly．
　　‘No books！’I cried．‘How can you manage without them in this lonely place？’
　　‘I always used to read so much that Mr Heathcliff decided to take away my only pleasure and destroy my books．I've looked all over the house for them．Joseph only reads the Bible，but some of my books are in Hareton's room！Why did you take them，Hareton？Just because you enjoy stealing？They can't be any use to you！’
　　‘I think Mr Hareton wants to learn，’I said，hoping to prevent a quarrel between them．‘No doubt he took them away to study them．’
　　‘Yes，'replied Cathy，laughing．‘I hear him trying to read to himself sometimes and it's extremely funny！He makes some terrible mistakes！’
　　After a moment's shocked silence Hareton left the room．He returned almost immediately with his arms full of books，and threw them angrily down at Cathy's feet．
　　‘Take them！’he shouted．‘I never want to see them again！’
　　‘I won't have them now，'she said．‘I'll hate them because they'll make me think of you．’
　　Hareton picked up the books and threw them on the fire，then walked quickly out of the house．
　　Mr Heathcliff came in as Hareton went out．He had a restless，anxious expression on his face．
　　‘Mr Heathcliff，’I said，‘I must tell you I'm leaving for London next week，for six months，and I shan't want to rent the Grange any more after October．’
　　‘So，Mr Lockwood，you've got tired of the moors already，have you？Well，have your lunch with Hareton and me，anyway．Cathy，take your lunch in the kitchen with Joseph and Zillah．’
　　I did not enjoy lunch with my two silent companions，and left the Heights straight afterwards．
　　‘What a pity，’I thought，‘that Cathy Heathcliff and I didn't fall in love，as Mrs Dean would have liked！Then I could have taken her away from this miserable place for ever！’
　　Several months later，in September，I was travelling to visit friends in Yorkshire．I found myself near Thrushcross Grange，and decided to spend a night there．After all，I was still paying rent for it．When I arrived，I was surprised to find a different housekeeper，who told me Mrs Dean had become housekeeper at the Heights．I wanted to have a walk after travelling all day，so I left orders for the woman to cook my supper and prepare bedroom for me，and I walked the four miles to Wuthering Heights．
　　As I came close to the old house，I noticed that there were flowers in the garden，and the doors and windows stood open．I could see two people inside，and I stopped for a moment，curious to hear a little of their conversation．
　　‘Read it again，stupid！'said a voice as sweet as a silver bell．‘Read it correctly this time，or I'll pull your hair！’
　　‘You must kiss me if I get it right，’answered a deep voice．The man was sitting at a table，reading from a book．His handsome face shone with pleasure，and his eyes often left the book to look at the small white hand that lay on his shoulder．The girl stood behind him，bending over to help him．Her face—it was fortunate he could not see her face，or he would never have been able to concentrate on his studies．I could see it，and I was bitterly sorry that I had thrown away my chance of seeing that beauty every day of my life．
　　I did not want to disturb their happiness，so I went round to the back door，where I discovered my old friend Ellen Dean．
　　‘Oh，Mr Lockwood，welcome back！'she cried．‘Are you staying at the Grange again？’
　　‘Yes，Mrs Dean，just for one night．But tell me，why are you housekeeper here now and not at the Grange？’
　　‘Zillah left，you see，and Mr Heathcliff wanted me here．’
　　‘I have a little business with him，about the rent．’
　　‘Oh！Mr Heathcliff is dead，sir．He died three months ago．I manage all Mrs Heathcliff's business for her．She hasn't learnt to do it herself yet，you see．’
　　‘Heathcliff is dead！’I repeated，surprised．‘Well！Tell me how it happened，Mrs Dean！’
　　‘Sit down，sir，and drink some beer．I'll gladly tell you．His life ended very strangely．’






■ 18 Heathcliff's end
　　1801—2 I was delighted to come back to the Heights，and hoped I could make Cathy's life more comfortable．But she was restless，and complained of loneliness．At first she continued to annoy Hareton，by laughing at him，but after a while she decided she really wanted him as a friend．She apologized for being rude to him，and offered to teach him ev erything she knew．From that moment on，the two cousins have always been together，studying．Hareton has a lot to learn，and Cathy is not the most patient of teachers．But what they have in common is their love for each other．You see，Mr Lockwood，it was easy enough to win Cathy's heart．But now I'm glad you didn't try．I'll be the happiest woman in England when those two marry！
　　Heathcliff noticed little of what was happening around him，and would never have been aware of the cousins’feelings，if it hadn't been for Joseph．In the middle of our lunch one day，the old man rushed into the room，shaking with anger．
　　‘I'll have to leave！I wanted to die here，where I've been a servant for sixty years！But now she's taken my garden from me！She's stolen the boy's soul，master！I can't bear it！’
　　‘Is the fool drunk？’asked Heathcliff．‘Can you explain this，Hareton？’
　　‘I've pulled up two or three of his fruit-trees，’confessed Hareton，‘but I'll put them back again．’
　　‘It was my fault，’added Cathy bravely．‘I asked him to do it．We wanted to plant some flowers there．’
　　‘Who the devil gave you permission？’growled Heathcliff．
　　‘You should let me have a bit of garden，as you've taken all my land！'replied Cathy sharply．‘And you've taken Hareton's land too！He and I are friends now！I'll tell him about you！’
　　The master stood up，staring at her fiercely．
　　‘Out of the room，wicked girl！’he shouted．‘I'll kill you if I get near you！’
　　‘If you hit me，Hareton will hit you．He won't obey you any more，and soon he'll hate you as much as I do！’
　　‘You’d better leave，Cathy，’whispered Hareton urgently．‘I won't quarrel with Mr Heathcliff．’
　　But it was too late．I was sure Heathcliff was going to hit her．He took hold of her，one strong hand in her hair and the other raised over her head．But when he looked into her face，his anger suddenly disappeared，and he let his arm fall to his side．He sat heavily down in his chair and put his hand over his eyes for a moment．We all stared at him．
　　‘You must learn not to make me angry，’he said，trying to be calm．‘Go away，all of you！Leave me alone！’A little later he went out，saying he would return in the evening．
　　As darkness fell，Cathy and Hareton were busy at their studies in the kitchen．I was sitting with them，happy to see them helping each other so well．I feel they're almost my children，Mr Lockwood，and I'm very proud of them．As the master entered the house，he had a full view of us three．They lifted their eyes to meet his．Perhaps you haven't noticed it，but their eyes are very similar，and they are exactly like those of Catherine Earnshaw．Mr Heathcliff stopped and stared，then looked away．At a sign from me，Cathy and Hareton went quietly out into the garden，leaving me alone with Mr Heathcliff．
　　‘It's silly，isn't it，Ellen，’he muttered，‘that I have worked all my life to destroy these two families，the Earn shaws and the Lintons．I've got their money and their land．Now I can take my final revenge on the last Earnshaw and the last Linton，I no longer want to！There's a strange change coming in my life．I'm in its shadow．I'm so little interested in daily events that I even forget to eat and drink．I don't want to see those two，that's why I don't care if they spend time together．She only makes me angry．And he looks so like Catherine！But everything reminds me of Catherine！In every cloud，in every tree I see her face！The whole world reminds me that she was here once，and I have lost her！’
　　‘You don't feel ill，sir，do you？Are you afraid of death？’
　　‘I'm not ill，Ellen，and I'm not afraid to die．But I can't continue like this！I have to remind myself to breathe—almost to remind my heart to beat！I have a single wish，for some thing my whole body and heart and brain have wanted for so long！Oh God！It's a long fight！I wish it were finished！’
　　For some days after that，Mr Heathcliff avoided meeting us at meals．He ate less and less．Late one night I heard him leave the house．He did not return until the morning．When he came in，I noticed a change in his expression．There was a strange，wild happiness in his face，although he was pale and trembling．
　　‘Will you have some breakfast，sir？’I asked．
　　‘No，I'm not hungry，’he answered．
　　‘I don't think you should stay outside at night，sir．You'll catch a bad cold or a fever！’
　　‘Leave me alone，Ellen，’he replied．
　　I began to worry about him．He was strong and healthy，but a man must eat in order to live．For the next three days he ate nothing．At every meal the food lay untouched on the plate in front of him．He did not look at the food，or at us．He seemed to be looking at something quite close to him，some thing we could not see．His fierce black eyes followed it with such eager interest that he sometimes stopped breathing for as much as half a minute．
　　He did not sleep either．For three days he had spent the night in Catherine Earnshaw's old bedroom，and I could hear him walking up and down，and talking，calling，crying all night．
　　One morning I managed to speak to him，and make him listen to me．‘Mr Heathcliff，you must have some food and sleep．Look at yourself in the mirror！You look ill and tired．’
　　‘It's not my fault that I can't eat or rest．You wouldn't tell a drowning man to rest when he can see the shore！I'm close to what I've wanted for eighteen years，very close！But my soul's happiness is killing my body！’
　　‘It's a strange kind of happiness，master．Take my advice，and pray to God to forgive you for what you've done wrong in the past，if you think you're going to die．’
　　‘Thank you，Ellen，you've reminded me of something．It's the way I want to be buried．My coffin will be carried to the churchyard in the evening．You and Hareton will be present，nobody else．And make sure my orders about the two coffins are obeyed！I want no ceremony，or words from the Bible—I don't believe in any of that．’
　　He spent the next night，and the next day，in Catherine's room，muttering and sobbing all the time．I sent for Dr Kenneth，but the door was locked，so the doctor could not see him．The following night was very wet，and in the morning as I walked in the garden，I noticed that the bedroom window was wide open．
　　‘He must be very wet if he's in bed，’I thought，‘the bed is so close to the window．I'll go and look．’I found another key which fitted the lock，and opened the door．Mr Heathcliff was there in bed，lying on his back．His eyes were staring at me，so eagerly and fiercely，and he seemed to be smiling！His face and clothes were wet from the rain，and he did not move．I realized he was dead！
　　I closed the window．I combed his long，black hair from his forehead．I tried to close his eyes，but they would not shut．Suddenly frightened，I called for Joseph．The old servant came at once，but refused to touch the body．
　　‘Ah，the devil's taken his soul！I warned him that would happen！’he cried．‘You see how wicked he is，smiling at death！But thank God Hareton Earnshaw will have the house and land now，that he should have inherited from his father！’And he went down on his knees to pray．
　　Hareton was，in fact，the only one who was sad at Heathcliff's death．He and I were present at the burial．Heathcliff was buried next to Catherine's grave，as he had wished．As we were not sure of his age or anything else about him，there is only one word on his gravestone—Heathcliff．The villagers are very frightened of his ghost．They say he often haunts the churchyard and the moors．
　　Hareton and Cathy will be married on New Year's Day，and they'll move to the Grange．I'll be their housekeeper．Joseph will take care of Wuthering Heights，but most of the rooms here won't be used again．
　　You'll pass the churchyard，Mr Lockwood，on your way back to the Grange，and you'll see the three gravestones close to the moor．Catherine's，the middle one，is old now，and half buried in plants which have grown over it．On one side is Edgar Linton's，and on the other is Heathcliff's new one．If you stay there a moment，and watch the insects flying in the warm summer air，and listen to the soft wind breathing through the grass，you'll understand how quietly they rest，the sleepers in that quiet earth．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Far From The Madding Crowd by Thomas Hardy





■ 1 Gabriel Oak falls in love
　　Gabriel Oak was a sensible man of good character， who had been brought up by his father as a shepherd， and then managed to save enough money to rent his own farm on Norcombe Hill，in Dorset. He was twenty－eight，a tall，well－built man，who did not seem，however，to think his appear－ance was very important.
　　One winter morning he was in one of his fields on the side of Norcombe Hill . Looking over his gate，Gabriel could see a yellow cart，loaded with furniture and plants，coming up the road. Right on top of the pile sat a handsome young woman As Gabriel was watching，the cart stopped at the top of the hill，and the driver climbed down to go back and fetch some－thing that had fallen off.
　　The girl sat quietly in the sunshine for a few minutes. Then she picked up a parcel lying next to her，and looked round to see if the driver was coming back. There was no sign of him. She unwrapped the parcel，and took out the mirror it con-tained. The sun shone on her lovely face and hair. Although it was December，she looked almost summery，sitting there in her bright red jacket with the fresh green plants around her. She looked at herself in the mirror and smiled，thinking that only the birds could see her. But behind the gate Gabriel Oak was watching too.
　　‘She must be rather vain，’he thought. ‘She doesn't need to look in that mirror at all! ’
　　As the girl smiled and blushed at herself，she seemed to be dreaming，dreaming perhaps of men's hearts won and lost. When she heard the driver's footsteps，she packed the mirror away. The cart moved on downhill to the toll－gate. Gabriel followed on foot. As he came closer he could hear the driver arguing with the gatekeeper.
　　‘My mistress's niece，that's her on top of the furniture，is not going to pay you the extra twopence ，’said the driver. ‘She says she's offered you quite enough already. ’
　　‘Well，if she doesn't pay the toll，your mistress's niece can't pass through the gate，’replied the gatekeeper.
　　Gabriel thought that twopence did not seem worth bothering about, so he stepped forward. ‘Here，’he said，handing the coins to the gatekeeper，‘let the young woman pass. ’
　　The girl in the red jacket looked carelessly down at Gabriel，and told her man to drive on，without even thanking the farmer. Gabriel and the gatekeeper watched the cart move away. ‘That's a lovely young woman，’said the gatekeeper.
　　‘But she has her faults，’answered Gabriel.
　　‘True，farmer. ’
　　‘And the greatest of them is what it always is with women. ’
　　‘Wanting to win the argument every time？Oh，you're right. ’
　　‘No，her great fault is that she's vain. ’
　　A few days later，at nearly midnight on the longest night of the year，Gabriel Oak could be heard playing his flute on Nor-combe Hill. The sky was so clear and the stars so visible that the earth could almost be seen turning. In that cold，hard air the sweet notes of the flute rang out. The music came from a little hut on wheels，standing in the corner of a field. Shep－herds'huts like this are used as a shelter during the winter and spring，when shepherds have to stay out all night in the fields，looking after very young lambs.
　　Gabriel's two hundred and fifty sheep were not yet paid for He knew that，in order to make a success of the farming business，he had to make sure they produced a large number of healthy lambs. So he was determined to spend as many nights as necessary in the fields，to save his lambs from dying of cold or hunger.
　　The hut was warm and quite comfortable inside. There was a stove，and some bread and beer on a shelf. On each side of the hut was a round hole like a window，which could be closed with a piece of wood. These air－holes were usually kept open when the stove was burning， because too much smoke in a small，airless hut could kill the shepherd.
　　From time to time the sound of the flute stopped， and Gabriel came out of his hut to check his sheep. Whenever he discovered a half-dead new lamb，he brought the creature into the hut. In front of the stove it soon came back to life，and then he could return it to its mother.
　　He noticed a light further down the hill. It came from a wooden hut at the edge of a field. He walked down to it and put his eye to a hole in the wood. Inside，two women were feeding a sick cow. One of the women was middle－aged. The other was young and wore a cloak. Gabriel could not see her face.
　　‘ I think she'll be all right now，aunt，’said the younger woman. ‘I can come and feed her again in the morning. What a pity I lost my hat on the way here!’Just then the girl dropped her cloak，and her long hair fell on to the shoulders of her red jacket. Gabriel recognized the girl of the yellow cart and the mirror，the girl who owed him twopence.
　　The women left the hut，and Gabriel returned to his sheep.
　　As the sun was rising the next morning， Gabriel waited out-side his hut until he saw the young woman riding up the hill. She was sitting sideways on the horse in the usual lady's posi－tion. He suddenly thought of the hat she had lost，searched for it，and found it among some leaves on the ground. He was just going to go up to her to give it back， when the girl did some-thing very strange. Riding under the low branches of a tree，she dropped backwards flat on the horse's back，with her feet on its shoulders. Then，first looking round to make sure no one was watching，she sat up straight again and pulled her dress to her knees，with her legs on either side of the horse. This was obviously easier for riding，but not very ladylike. Gabriel was surprised and amused by her behaviour. He waited until she returned from her aunt's hut，and stepped out into the path in front of her.
　　‘I found a hat，’he said.
　　‘It's mine，’she said. She put it on and smiled. ‘It flew away. ’
　　‘At one o'clock this morning？’
　　‘Well，yes. I needed my hat this morning. I had to ride to the hut in that field，where there's a sick cow belonging to my aunt. ’
　　‘Yes，I know. I saw you. ’
　　‘Where？’she asked，horrified.
　　‘Riding all the way up the hill，along the path，’said Gabriel，thinking of her unladylike position on the horse's back.
　　A deep blush spread from her head to her neck. Gabriel turned sympathetically away，wondering when he dared look at her again. When he turned back，she had gone.
　　Five mornings and evenings passed. The young woman came regularly to take care of the sick cow，but never spoke to Gabriel. He felt very sorry he had offended her so much by telling her he had seen her when she thought she was alone.
　　Then，one freezing night，Gabriel returned，exhausted，to his hut. The warm air from the stove made him sleepy，and he forgot to open one of the air-holes before going to sleep. The next thing he knew was that the girl with the lovely face was 10 with him in the hut，holding his head in her arms.
　　‘Whatever is happening？’he asked，only half－conscious.
　　‘Nothing now，’she answered，‘but you could have died in this hut of yours. ’
　　‘Yes，I suppose I could，’said Gabriel. He was hoping he could stay there，close to her, for a long time He wanted to tell her so，but he knew he could not express himself well，so he stayed silent. ‘How did you find me？’he asked in the end.
　　‘Oh，I heard your dog scratching at the door，so I came to see what the matter was. I opened the door，and found you unconscious. It must have been the smoke from the stove. ’
　　‘I believe you saved my life，Miss——I don't know your name.
　　‘There's no need to know it. I probably won't see you again. ’
　　‘My name is Gabriel Oak. ’
　　‘Mine isn't. You sound very proud of your name. ’
　　‘Well，it's the only one I shall ever have. ’
　　‘I don't like mine. ’
　　‘I should think you'll soon get a new one. ’
　　‘Well！That's my business，Gabriel Oak. ’
　　‘I'm not very clever at talking，miss，but I want to thank you. Come，give me your hand！’
　　She hesitated，then offered her hand. He took it，but held it for only a moment. ‘I'm sorry，’he said. ‘I didn't mean to let your hand go so quickly. ’
　　‘You may have it again then. Here it is. ’
　　Gabriel held it longer this time. ‘How soft it is，even in winter，not rough at all! ’he said.
　　‘there，that's long enough，’she said，but without pulling it away. ‘But I suppose you're thinking you'd like to kiss it？You may if you want to. ’
　　‘I wasn't thinking any such thing，’said Gabriel，‘but—’
　　‘Oh no you won't！’She pulled her hand sharply away. ‘Now discover my name，’she added，laughing，and left.






■ 2 Disaster for Gabriel Oak
　　Young Farmer Oak was in love. He waited for the girl's regular visits to the sick cow just as impatiently as his dog waited to be fed. He discovered that her name was Bathsheba Everdene，and that she lived with her aunt，Mrs Hurst. His head was so full of her that he could think of nothing else.
　　‘I'll make her my wife，’he declared to himself，‘or I'll never be able to concentrate on work again！’
　　When she stopped coming to feed the sick cow，he had to find a reason for visiting her. So he took a young lamb，whose mother had died，and carried it in a basket across the fields to Mrs Hurst's house.
　　‘I've brought a lamb for Miss Everdene，’he told Bathshe－ba's aunt. ‘Girls usually like looking after lambs. ’
　　‘Thank you，Mr Oak，’replied Mrs Hurst，‘but Bathsheba is only a visitor here. I don't know if she'll keep it. ’
　　‘To tell you the truth，Mrs Hurst，the lamb isn't my real reason for coming. I want to ask Miss Everdene if she'd like to be married. ’
　　‘Really？’asked Mrs Hurst，looking closely at him.
　　‘Yes Because if she would，I'd like to marry her. Do you know if she has any other young men courting her at the moment？’
　　‘Oh yes，a lot of young men，’said Mrs Hurst. ‘You see，Farmer Oak，she's so handsome，and so well-educated too. Of course,I haven't actually seen any of her young men，but she must have at least ten or twelve！’
　　‘That's unfortunate，’said Farmer Oak，staring sadly at the floor. ‘I'm just a very ordinary man，and my only chance was being the first to ask to marry her. Well，that was all I came for. I'd better go home now， Mrs Hurst. ’
　　He had gone halfway across the first field when he heard a cry behind him. He turned，and saw a girl running after him. It was Bathsheba. Gabriel blushed.
　　‘Farmer Oak，’she called breathlessly，‘I want to say——my aunt made a mistake when she told you I had a lot of young men courting me. In fact，I haven't got any，and I've never had any. ’
　　‘I am glad to hear that！’said Gabriel，with a wide smile，holding out his hand to take hers. But she pulled her hand away quickly. ‘I have a nice comfortable little farm，’he added，a little less confidently. ‘And when we are married，I'm sure I can work twice as hard as I do now，and earn more. ’
　　He stretched out his arm towards her. Bathsheba moved rapidly behind a tree to avoid him. ‘But，Farmer Oak，’she said in surprise，‘I never said I was going to marry you. ’
　　‘Well！’said Gabriel，disappointed. ‘To run after me like this， and then say you don't want me！’
　　‘I only wanted to explain that my aunt was wrong，’she answered eagerly. ‘Anyway，I had to run to catch up with you，so I didn't have time to decide whetherl wanted to marry or not. ’
　　‘Just think for a minute or two，’replied Gabriel hopefully. ‘I'll wait a while， Miss Everdene. Will you marry me？ Do，Bathsheba. I love you very much！’
　　‘I'll try to think，’she answered. ‘Give me time，’and she looked away from him at the distant hills.
　　‘I can make you happy，’he said to the back of her head ‘You shall have a piano，and I'll practise the flute to play with you in the evenings. ’
　　‘Yes，I'd like that. ’
　　‘And at home by the fire，whenever you look up，there I'll be，and whenever I look up， there you'll be. ’
　　‘Wait，let me think！’She was silent for a while，and then turned to him. ‘No，’she said，‘I don't want to marry you. It'd be nice to have a wedding，but having a husband——well，he'd always be there. As you say，whenever I looked up，there he'd be. ’
　　‘Of course he would——it would be me. ’
　　‘that's the problem. I wouldn't mind being a bride，if I could be one without having a husband. But as a woman can't be a bride alone，I won't marry，at least not yet. ’
　　‘What a silly thing for a girl to say！’ cried Gabriel. And then he said softly，‘But darling，think again！’He moved round the tree to reach her. ‘Why won't you have me？’
　　‘Because I don't love you，’she replied， moving away.
　　‘But I love you——and I'm happy to be liked，if that's all you feel for me. ’He spoke more seriously than he had ever spoken before. ‘Only one thing is certain in this life——I shall love you，and want you，and keep on wanting you until I die. ’His feelings were plain to see in his honest face，and his large brown hands were trembling.
　　‘It seems wrong not to accept you when you feel so strongly，’she replied unhappily. ‘I wish I hadn't run after you！But we wouldn't be happy together，Mr Oak. I'm too independent. I need a husband who can keep me in order， and I'm sure you wouldn't be able to do that. ’
　　Gabriel looked hopelessly away and did not reply.
　　‘And，Mr Oak，’she continued in a clear voice，‘I'm so poor that my aunt has to provide a home for me. You're just starting your farming business. It would be much more sensi-ble for you to marry a woman with money. Then you could buy more sheep and improve your farm. ’
　　‘That's just what I'd been thinking！’ answered Gabriel in surprise.
　　What common sense she had，he thought admiringly.
　　‘Well then，why did you ask to marry me？’she said angrily.
　　‘I can't do what I think would be——sensible. I must do what my heart tells me. ’He did not see the trap she had set for him.
　　‘Now you've confessed that marrying me wouldn't be sen－sible， Mr Oak. Do you think I'll marry you after that？’
　　‘Don't mistake my meaning like that，’he cried，‘just because I'm honest enough to tell you the truth！I know you'd be a good wife for me. You speak like a lady，everyone says so，and your uncle at Weatherbury has a large farm，I've heard. May I visit you in the evenings，or will you come for a walk with me on Sundays？You don't have to decide at once. ’
　　‘No，no，I cannot. Don't insist，don't. I don't love you，so it would be foolish, ’she said with a laugh.
　　No man likes to see his feelings laughed at，so Gabriel Oak said，turning away，‘Very well，then I won't ask you again. ’
　　Gabriel did not see Bathsheba again and two days later he heard that she had left the area， and was now in Weatherbury，a village twenty miles away. Her departure did not stop Gabriel from loving her. In fact he loved her even more deeply now that they were apart.
　　The next night，before going to bed，Gabriel called his two dogs to come into the house for the night. His old dog，George，obeyed the call，but the younger one was missing. Gabriel was having difficulty training this young dog，which，although enthusiastic，still did not understand a sheep dog's duties. He did not worry about the dog's absence，but went to bed.
　　Very early in the morning he was woken by the sound of sheep bells，ringing violently. Shepherds know every sound that sheep bells make，and Gabriel immediately realized that his sheep were running fast. He jumped out of bed，threw on his clothes and ran up Norcombe Hill，to his fields near the chalk-pit.
　　There were his fifty sheep with their lambs，all safe，in one field. But in the other field，the two hundred pregnant sheep had completely disappeared. He noticed a broken gate，and felt sure the sheep had gone through it. There was no sign of them in the next field，but ahead of him at the top of the hill he saw the young dog，looking black against the morning sky. It was standing quite still，staring down into the chalk-pit.
　　Gabriel felt sick as he realized the horrible truth. He hurried up the hill to the edge of the chalk-pit，and looked down into it. In the deep pit lay his dead and dying sheep，two hundred of them，which would have produced two hundred more in the next few weeks. The young，untrained dog must have chased them up to the edge of the pit，where they fell to their death.
　　His first feeling was pity for those gentle sheep and their unborn lambs. Then he thought of himself. All his savings，which he had worked so hard for in the last ten years，had been spent on renting the farm. Now his hopes of being an independent farmer were destroyed. He covered his face with his hands.
　　After a while he looked up. ‘Thank God I'm not married to Bathsheba，’he thought. ‘What would she have done，mar－ried to a husband as poor as I shall be！’
　　The young dog was shot the next day. Gabriel sold all his farm tools to pay what he owed for the sheep. He was no longer a farmer，just an ordinary man who owned the clothes he was wearing and nothing more. Now he had to find work where he could，on other men's farms.






■ 3 The fire
　　Two months later Gabriel went to the great fair at Casterbridge，hoping to find a job as farm manager. But when he realized by late afternoon that none of the farmers at Casterbridge wanted a farm manager，or even a shepherd，he decided to try his luck at another fair the next day. It was fifteen miles further away，in a village the other side of Weatherbury. The name Weatherbury reminded him of Bathsheba，and he wondered if she still lived there. He set out on foot as it was getting dark，and had already walked three or four miles when he saw a cart，half-full of hay，by the side of the road. ‘That's a comfortable place to sleep，’he thought，and he was so tired after his long，disappointing day at the fair that when he climbed into the cart，he fell asleep immediately.
　　A couple of hours later，however，he was woken by the movement of the cart. It was being driven towards Weather－bury by two farm workers，who had not noticed Gabriel. He listened to their conversation.
　　‘She's a handsome woman，that's true，’said one，‘but proud too！And very vain，that's what people say！’
　　‘Oh，if she's vain，Billy Smallbury，I'll never be able to look at her！I'm such a shy man，as you know！’said the other. ‘A single woman，and vain！And does she pay her farm workers well？’
　　‘I don't know about that，Joseph Poorgrass. ’
　　Gabriel thought they could be talking about Bathsheba，except that the woman they were discussing seemed to be the mistress of a farm. As the cart was now quite near Weather－bury，Gabriel jumped out，unseen by the two men. He climbed a gate into a field，intending to sleep for the rest of the night under a hay－rick，but then he noticed an unusual light in the darkness，about half a mile away. Something was on fire.
　　He hurried across the fields towards the fire. Soon，in the rich orange light of the flames，he could see a hay－rick burning fiercely. It was too late to save the rick，so for a few minutes he stood and stared at the flames. But when the smoke cleared for a moment，he was horrified to see，very close to the burn－ing rick，a whole row of wheat－ricks. These probably con－tained most of the wheat produced on the farm that year，and could catch fire at any moment.
　　As he rushed towards the wheat－rick that was most in dan-ger，he saw he was not alone. A crowd of farm workers had seen the fire and run into the field to help save the wheat，but they were so confused they did not know what to do. Gabriel took control and gave orders.
　　‘Get a large cloth！’he shouted. ‘Put it over the wheat－rick，so the wind can't blow the flames from the hay－rick on to it！Now，you，stand here with a bucket of water and keep the cloth wet！’The men hurried to obey him. The flames，prevented from burning the bottom and sides of the wheat-32 rick，began to attack its roof.
　　‘Get me a ladder！’cried Gabriel. ‘And a branch，and some water！’He climbed up the wheat－rick and sat on the top，beating down the flames with the branch. Billy Smallbury，one of the men who had been in the cart，climbed up with a bucket of water， to throw water on Gabriel and keep the flames off him. The smoke was at its thickest at this corner of the rick， but Gabriel never stopped his work.
　　On the ground the villagers were doing what they could to stop the fire，which was not much. A little further away was a young woman who had just arrived on her horse，witn her maid on foot. They were watching the fire and discussing Gabriel.
　　‘He's a fine young man，ma'am，’said Liddy，the maid. ‘And look at his clothes！They're all burnt！’
　　‘Who does he work for？’asked the woman in a clear voice.
　　‘I don't know，ma'am，nor do the others. He's a stranger. ’
　　‘Jan Coggan！’called the woman to one of her workers. ‘Do you think the wheat is safe now？’
　　‘I think so，yes，ma'am，’he answered. ‘If the fire had spread to this wheat－rick，all the other ricks would have caught fire too. That brave young man up there on top of the rick is the one who's saved your wheat. ’
　　‘He does work hard，’said the young woman，looking up at Gabriel, who had not noticed her. ‘I wish he worked for me. ’
　　As the ricks were no longer in danger， Gabriel started to climb down，and at the bottom he met the maid.
　　‘I have a message from the farmer，who wishes to thank you for all you've done，’she said.
　　‘Where is he？’asked Gabriel，suddenly aware of the chance of getting some work.
　　‘It isn't a he，it's a she，’answered the girl.
　　‘A woman farmer？’asked Gabriel.
　　‘Yes，and a rich one too！’said a villager who was standing near. ‘She inherited her uncle's farm，when he died suddenly. She has business in every bank in Casterbridge！’
　　‘She's over there，wrapped in a cloak，on her horse，’added the maid. In the darkness Gabriel could only see the shape of a woman sitting on a horse. He walked over to her. Although his face was black from the smoke and his clothes were burnt by the fire，he remembered to lift his hat politely，and asked, looking up at her，‘Do you want a shepherd，ma'am？’She let her cloak fall back from her head in surprise. Gabriel and his cold-hearted darling，Bathsheba Everdene，stared at each other. She did not speak. He only repeated sadly，‘Do you want a shepherd，ma'am？’
　　Bathsheba turned away into the shadows to consider. She was a little sorry for him， but also glad that she had improved her position since they last met. She realized she had almost forgotten his offer of marriage on Norcombe Hill.
　　‘Yes，’she answered quietly，blushing a little，‘I do want a shepherd. But—’
　　‘He's just the right man，ma'am，’said one of the villagers.
　　‘That's right！’said a second，and a third.
　　‘Then will you men tell him to speak to the farm manager？’said Bathsheba in a businesslike way，as she rode off.
　　Gabriel soon arranged the details of his employment with Bathsheba's farm manager，Benjy Pennyways，and walked on to the village to find a place to live. As he walked，he thought of Bathsheba. How quickly the young girl he remembered had become the capable mistress of a farm！
　　When he passed the churchyard，and the ancient trees around it，he noticed that someone was standing behind one of the trees.
　　‘Is this the right way to Weatherbury？’asked Gabriel.
　　‘Oh yes，straight on，’said a girl's voice，low and sweet. After a pause she added，‘You're not a Weatherbury man？’
　　‘No，I'm the new shepherd，just arrived. ’
　　‘Only a shepherd！You seem almost like a farmer to me. ’
　　‘Only a shepherd，’repeated Gabriel in a dull voice，think－ing of the disaster that had destroyed his hopes of being a farmer.
　　‘Please don't tell anyone in the village that you've seen me，’begged the girl. ‘I'm rather poor，and I don't want anyone to know about me. ’ Her thin arms trembled in the cold.
　　‘I won't tell anyone，’said Gabriel，‘but you ought to be wearing a cloak on a night like this. ’
　　‘Oh，it doesn't matter. Please go on and leave me. ’
　　He hesitated ‘Perhaps you'd accept this. It's not much，but it's all I have to spare. ’He put a coin into her small hand，and as he touched her wrist he noticed how quickly the blood was beating. It was the same quick，hard beat that he felt in his lambs when they were close to death.
　　‘What's the matter？Can't I help you？’he asked. He felt a deep sadness in this thin，weak creature.
　　‘No，no！Don't tell anyone you've seen me！Good night！’She stayed in the shadows，and Gabriel went on to Weather-bury.






■ 4 Fanny Robin disappears
　　The farm manager had advised Gabriel to go straight to the malthouse in Weatherbury，to ask for somewhere to stay. That was the place where the men of the village spent their evenings，drinking beer and talking by the fire. When Gabriel entered the warm，dark room，some of Bathsheba's workers recognized him.
　　‘Come in，shepherd，you're welcome，’said one.
　　‘Gabriel Oak is my name，neighbours. ’
　　The ancient maltster，with his white hair and long white beard，turned his old head stiffly towards Gabriel. ‘Gabriel Oak of Norcombe！’he said. ‘I knew your grandparents well！My boy Jacob and his young son Billy know your family too. ’His boy Jacob was bald and toothless，and young Billy was about forty.
　　‘You must be very old，maltster，’said Gabriel politely，‘to have such an old son as Jacob here. ’
　　‘Yes，I've lived for over a hundred years，’replied the little old man proudly. ‘Sit down and drink with us，shepherd. ’
　　The cup of warm beer passed round the circle of drinkers. There was silence for a moment. Then Gabriel turned the conversation to the matter closest to his heart.
　　‘What kind of mistress is Miss Everdene？’he asked.
　　‘We know almost nothing of her，shepherd，’answered Jan Coggan，a big，cheerful man with a red face. ‘She only arrived here a few days ago，when her uncle died. But the Everdenes are a good family to work for. Of course，it's the farm manager who'll be giving us our orders. ’
　　‘Ah！’said the maltster，frowning. ‘Benjy Pennyways！’
　　‘You can't trust him！’added Jacob darkly.
　　Soon afterwards Gabriel left with Jan Coggan，who had offered the shepherd a bed in his house. The remaining men were just preparing to leave when suddenly a young man called Laban Tall rushed into the malthouse，almost too excited to speak.
　　‘It's Benjy Pennyways！’he cried. ‘Miss Everdene's caught him stealing wheat from the barn！She's sent him away！And worse than that——Fanny Robin，you know，Miss Everdene's youngest maid，is missing！The mistress wants us to look for her tomorrow. And Billy Smallbury，she wants you to go to Casterbridge，to see if you can find the young soldier who's been courting Fanny. ’
　　That night the news spread fast round the village，but did not reach Gabriel，whose dreams were only of Bathsheba. Through the long slow hours of darkness he saw her lovely face and forgot that she did not love him.
　　The next morning Bathsheba and her maid Liddy were dust-ing some books，when a visitor arrived at the front door. It was Mr Boldwood，who had a large farm in Weatherbury.
　　‘I can't see him like this，Liddy！’said Bathsheba，looking in horror at her dusty dress. ‘Go down and tell him I'm busy. ’
　　When Liddy came back， after Mr Boldwood had gone，Bathsheba asked，‘What did he want， Liddy？ And who is he，exactly？’
　　‘He just wanted to ask if Fanny had been found，miss. You know，as she had no family or friends，he was kind enough to pay for her to go to school，and found her a job here with your uncle. He's your neighbour. His farm is next to yours. ’
　　‘Is he married？ And how old is he？’
　　‘He isn't married. He's abeut forty，very handsome—and rich. All the girls in the area have tried to persuade him to marry. But he just doesn't seem interested in women. Have you ever had an offer of marriage，miss？’
　　‘Yes，I have，Liddy，’answered Bathsheba after a pause，thinking of Gabriel. ‘But he wasn't quite good enough for me. ’
　　‘Oh，how nice to be able to refuse，when most of us are glad to accept the first offer！ And did you love him，miss？’
　　‘Oh no. But I rather liked him. ’
　　In the afternoon Bathsheba called her workers together，and spoke to them in the old hall of the farmhouse.
　　‘Men，I want to tell you that I'm not going to employ a new farm manager. I shall manage the farm myself. ’There were gasps of surprise from the men. She gave her orders for the next week's farm work and then turned to one of the 46 men. ‘Billy Smallbury， what have you discovered about Fanny Robin？’
　　‘I think she's run away with her young man，ma'am. The soldiers have left Casterbridge，and I suppose she's gone with them. ’
　　‘Well，perhaps we'll discover more later. One of you can go and tell Mr Boldwood what Billy says. Now，men，I hope I can trust you all to do your work well for me. Goodnight. ’
　　Later that evening，in a town many miles north of Weather bury，a small white shape could be seen walking slowly along a path beside a large building. It was a dull，snowy night，with heavy grey clouds hanging low in the sky，the kind of night when hopes are destroyed and love is lost.
　　‘One. Two. Three. Four. Five. ’The white shape was counting windows in the building. Then it began to throw small stones，covered in snow，at the fifth window. At last the window opened，and a man called out，‘Who's there？’
　　‘Is that Sergeant Troy？’asked a girl's voice.
　　‘Yes，’answered the man. ‘Who are you？’
　　‘Oh Frank，don't you know me？’cried the girl desperately.
　　‘I'm your—I'm Fanny Robin. ’
　　‘Fanny！’gasped the man in surprise. ‘How did you get here？’
　　‘I walked most of the way from Weatherbury. But，Frank，are you glad to see me？ Frank，when will it be？’
　　‘What are you talking about？’
　　‘You know，you promised. When shall we be married，Frank？’
　　‘Oh，I see. Well—you need proper clothes—we must inform the vicar. It takes time. I didn't expect you to come so soon. ’
　　‘Oh Frank，I love you so！And—you said you'd marry me—’
　　‘Don't cry now！It's foolish. If I said so，of course I will. I'll come and see you tomorrow to decide the details. ’
　　‘Oh yes，Frank，do！I'm staying at Mrs Twill’s in North Street. Come tomorrow，Frank！Goodnight，Frank！’






■ 5 Bathsheba sends a valentine
　　When Bathsheba first appeared at the weekly Caster－ bridge market，where farmers bought and sold their wheat and animals，she caused a sensation. Men's heads turned to look at her，the only woman there. Like any woman，she was happy to be admired，but she was also deter- mined to sell her wheat at a good price，and to do business with the other farmers like a man. There was one farmer， however，who did not seem to notice her，and this annoyed her a little. It was Mr Boldwood.
　　One Sunday afternoon，on the thirteenth of February，Bathsheba and Liddy were in the sitting－room together. It was a dull，cold day，and they were both very bored.
　　‘Have you ever tried to discover who you're going to marry，miss，’asked Liddy，‘with a Bible and a key？’
　　‘I don't believe in such foolish games，Liddy. ’
　　‘Well，some people believe it works. ’
　　‘All right，let's try it，’said Bathsheba suddenly，jumping up from her seat. Together they opened the big family Bible and put a key on a page.
　　‘Now you think of someone you could marry，miss，’said Liddy，‘then read aloud the words on that page，and if the Bible moves，perhaps you'll marry him. ’
　　Bathsheba read the words，holding the Bible. As they watched，the Bible turned in her hands，and Bathsheba blushed.
　　‘Who were you thinking of？’asked Liddy curiously.
　　‘I'm not going to tell you，’answered her mistress.
　　‘By the way，did you notice Mr Boldwood in church this morning？’asked Liddy，making it very clear who she was thinking of. ‘He didn't turn his head once to look at you！’
　　‘Why should he？’replied Bathsheba，annoyed. ‘I didn't ask him to look at me. ’
　　‘Oh no. But everybody else in church was looking at you. ’
　　Bathsheba did not reply to this. After a few minutes she said，‘Oh，I nearly forgot the valentine card I bought yester－ day！’
　　‘A valentine！Who's it for，miss？Farmer Boldwood？’
　　‘No，of course not. It's for one of the village children，that sweet little boy of Jan Coggan's. I'll write the address on the envelope now，and we'll post it today. ’
　　‘What fun it would be to send it to that silly old Bold－ wood！’laughed Liddy.
　　Bathsheba paused to consider. It was certainly a little de－ pressing that the wealthiest and most important man in the area did not seem to admire her，as all the other men did.
　　‘We'll throw a coin to decide，’she said lightly. ‘No，we shouldn't play with money on a Sunday. I know，we'll throw this book. If it comes down open，I'll send the valentine to Jan's son. If it comes down shut，I'll send it to Boldwood. ’ The little book went up in the air and came down shut. Bathsheba immediately picked up her pen and wrote Bold-wood's address on the envelope.
　　‘Now we need a seal，’she said. ‘Look for an interesting one，Liddy. Ah，let's use this one. I can't remember what it says，but I know it's funny. ’When she had sealed the enve－lope，Bathsheba looked closely at the words left by the seal：
　　‘MARRY ME’.
　　‘Just right！’she cried. ‘That would make even a vicar laugh！’And so the valentine was sent，not for love，but as a joke. Bathsheba had no idea of the effect it would have.
　　It arrived at Mr Boldwood's house on the morning of St Valentine's Day，14th February He was puzzled，but strangely excited by it He had never received one before，and all day he thought about it. Who could the woman be who admired him so much that she sent him a valentine？He kept on looking at it，until the words on the large red seal danced in front of his tired eyes，and he could no longer read them. But he knew what they said：
　　‘MARRY ME’.
　　The valentine had destroyed the peaceful routine of Bold－wood's life. That night he dreamed of the unknown woman，and when he woke up very early，the first thing he saw was the valentine，with its message in red，on the table by his bed.
　　‘Marry me，’he repeated to himself. He was too restless to sleep any more so he went out for a walk. He watched the sun rise over the snowy fields，and on his way home he met the postman，who handed him a letter. Boldwood took it quickly and opened it，thinking it could be from the sender of the valentine.
　　‘I don't think it's for you，sir，’said the postman. ‘I think it's for your shepherd. ’
　　Boldwood looked at the address on the envelope：
　　To the new shepherd，
　　Weatherbury Farm，
　　Near Casterbridge.
　　‘Oh，what a mistake！It isn't mine，or my shepherd's. It must be for Miss Everdene's shepherd. His name is Gabriel Oak. ’
　　At that moment he noticed a figure in a distant field.
　　‘Ah，there he is now，’Boldwood added. ‘I'll take the let－ ter to him myself. ’The shepherd started walking towards the malthouse，and Boldwood followed him，holding the letter.






■ 6 Fanny's mistake
　　At the malthouse the men were discussing Bathsheba. ‘How's she getting on without a farm manager？’the old maltster asked the younger men.
　　‘She can't manage the farm alone，’replied Jacob，‘and she won't listen to our advice. Proud，she is. I've often said it，’
　　‘You have，Jacob，you have，that's true，’agreed little Joseph Poorgrass.
　　‘But she's intelligent，’said Billy Smallbury，‘and must have some common sense. ’
　　‘It seems her old uncle's furniture wasn't good enough for her，’said the maltster‘I hear she's bought new beds，chairs and a piano！If she's a farmer，why does she want a piano？ ’
　　Just then they heard a heavy footstep outside，and a voice called，‘Neighbours，can I bring a few lambs in there？’
　　‘Of course，shepherd，’they all replied.
　　Gabriel appeared in the doorway，his cheeks red and his healthy face shining. On his shoulders were four half－dead lambs，which he put down carefully，close to the fire.
　　‘I haven't got a shepherd's hut here，as I used to have at Norcombe，’he explained. ‘These new lambs would die if I couldn't keep them warm for a while. It's very kind of you，maltster，to let me bring them in here. ’
　　‘We've been talking of the mistress，and her strange behaviour，shepherd，’said the maltster.
　　‘What have you been saying about her？’asked Gabriel sharply，turning to the others. ‘I suppose you've been speak- ing against her？’he added angrily to Joseph Poorgrass.
　　‘No，no，not a word，’said Joseph，trembling and blushing with terror.
　　‘well，look here，neighbours. ’Gabriel，although normally one of the quietest and most gentle men on earth，had sudden－ly become aggressive. ‘The first man I hear saying anything bad about our mistress will receive this in his face，’and he banged his great heavy hand down on the maltster's table.
　　‘Now don't get so angry，shepherd，and sit down！’said Jacob.
　　‘We hear you're a very clever man，shepherd，’added Joseph Poorgrass from behind the maltster's bed，where he had been hiding. ‘We all wish we were as clever as you，don't we，neighbours？’There was general agreement.
　　‘I think mistress ought to have made you her farm manager，you're so suitable for the job，’continued Joseph. He could see that Gabriel was no longer angry.
　　‘I don't mind confessing I was hoping to be her farm man－ ager，’said Gabriel in his honest way. ‘But Miss Everdene can do as she likes，and she's chosen to manage her own farm—and keep me as an ordinary shepherd only. ’He sounded rather depressed，and looked sadly into the fire.
　　Before anyone could reply，the door opened and Mr Bold－ wood came in. He greeted them all and handed the letter to Gabriel.
　　‘I opened this by mistake，Oak，’he said，‘but it must be for you. I'm sorry. ’
　　‘Oh，it doesn't matter at all，’answered Gabriel，who had no secrets from anyone. He read this letter：
　　Dear friend，
　　I don't know your name，but I want to thank you for your kindness to me on the night I left Weatherbury. I'm also returning the money you gave me. I'm happy to say I'm going to marry the young man who has been courting me， Sergeant Troy. As he is a nobleman's son，I know he wouldn't like me to accept a gift from anyone. Please don't tell anyone about my marriage. We intend to surprise Weatherbury by arriuing there as husband and wife，very soon. Thank you again.
　　Fanny Robin.
　　‘You'd better read it，Mr Boldwood，’said Gabriel. ‘It's from Fanny Robin. She wants to keep this a secret but I know you're interested in her. I met her on my way to Weather- bury，but I didn't know then who she was. ’ When Mr Boldwood had finished reading the letter，he looked very serious. ‘Poor Fanny！’he said. ‘I don't think this Sergeant Troy will ever marry her. He's clever，and handsome，but he can't be trusted. What a silly girl Fanny is！’
　　‘I'm very sorry to hear that，’said Gabriel.
　　‘By the way，Oak，’said Mr Boldwood quietly，as he and the shepherd left the malthouse together，‘could you tell me whose writing this is？’He showed Gabriel the envelope containing the valentine.
　　Gabriel looked at it，and said simply，‘Miss Everdene’s. ’Then he realized that Bathsheba must have written to Mr Boldwood without signing her name，and he looked，puzzled， at the farmer.
　　Mr Boldwood replied rather too quickly to Gabriel's unspo－ ken question. ‘It's quite normal to try to discover who has written the——valentine. That's the——fun of it. ’There was no fun at all in his manner. ‘Goodbye，Oak，’he added，and walked slowly back to his empty house.
　　A few days later，in the town north of Weatherbury where the soldiers were staying，a wedding was arranged As the church clock in the square struck half-past eleven，a handsome young soldier marched into the church and spoke to the vicar Then he stood still in the centre of the church，waiting for his bride. The church was full of the women and girls who had at－ tended the morning service and had decided to wait to see the wedding. They watched the young man's straight back，whis－ pering among themselves. The soldier waited without moving a muscle. The church clock struck a quarter to twelve，and still the bride did not come. The whispers stopped，and there was silence. The young man stood as stiff and straight as the church columns around him. There was a little quiet laughter from some of the women，but soon they were silent again，waiting for the end.
　　As the church clock struck twelve，they listened to the heavy notes ringing out from the church tower. The vicar left his position near the soldier，and disappeared into a back room. Every woman in the church was waiting to see the young man's face，and he knew it. At last he turned，and marched bravely back the way he had come，through the rows of smiling women.
　　When he got outside and crossed the square，he met a girl hurrying towards the church. When she saw him，the anxiety on her face changed to terror.
　　‘Well’？’he said，staring coldly at her.
　　‘Oh Frank，I made a mistake！I thought it was the other church，he one near the market，and I waited there till a quarter to twelve，and then I realized my mistake. But it doesn't matter，because we can just as easily get married tomorrow. ’
　　‘You're a fool，to play games with me！’he replied angrily.
　　‘So shall we get married tomorrow，Frank？’she asked，not understanding how seriously she had offended him. ‘Tomorrow！’he repeated，and laughed. ‘I don't want another experience like that for a while，I can promise you！’
　　‘But Frank，’she begged in a trembling voice，‘it wasn't such a terrible mistake！Now，dear Frank，when will our wedding be？’
　　‘Ah，when？God knows！’he said，and turning away from her，walked rapidly away.






■ 7 Farmer Boldwood proposes marriage
　　On Saturday at Casterbridge market Boldwood saw the woman who was disturbing his dreams. For the first time he turned his head and looked at her. It was in fact the first time in his life that he had looked at any woman. Up to now he had considered women to be distant，almost foreign creatures who had nothing to do with him. Now he saw Bathsheba's hair，and every detail of her face. He noticed her figure，her dress，and even her feet. She seemed very beauti-ful to him，and his heart began to move within him. ‘And this woman，this lovely young woman，has asked me to marry her！’he thought. As he was watching Bathsheba selling wheat to another farmer，he was filled with jealousy.
　　All this time Bathsheba was aware of his eyes on her. At last she had made him look at her！But she would have pre－ferred him to admire her from the beginning，without the en- couragement of her valentine. She felt sorry she had disturbed the usual calmness of a man she respected，but considered she could not apologize to him without either offending or encour-aging him.
　　Mr Boldwood did not try to speak to her，and returned home to his farm. He was a man of strong feelings，which normally lay hidden deep inside him. Because he was serious，and did not joke with his neighbours，people thought he was cold But when he loved or hated，it was with his whole heart. If Bathsheba had known how strong the feelings of this dark and silent figure were，she would have blamed herself terribly for her thoughtlessness. But nobody guessed what lay behind his calm appearance.
　　A few days later Mr Boldwood was looking at Bathsheba's fields，which were next to his own，when he saw her helping Gabriel Oak with the sheep. To Boldwood，Bathsheba shone like the moon on a dark night. His heart，which had never been touched before，was filled completely with his love for her. He decided to go and speak to her.
　　As he stopped at the gate of the field，Bathsheba looked up and noticed him. Gabriel was watching her face and saw her blush. He immediately thought of the envelope，with the valentine，that Boldwood had shown him，and suspected Bathsheba of encouraging the farmer to fall in love with her.
　　Boldwood realized they had noticed him，and suddenly felt unsure of himself. He did not know enough about women to discover from Bathsheba's manner whether she wanted to see him or not. And so he did not enter the field，but walked on， past the gate.
　　Bathsheba，however，knew that he had come to see her， and felt extremely guilty. She promised herself never again to disturb the peace of this man's life. Unfortunately her promise was made too late，as such promises often are.
　　It was not until the end of May that Boldwood was brave enough to declare his love. He went to Bathsheba's house，where the maids told him their mistress was watching the sheep－washing. Every spring the sheep were washed in a spe－ cial pool，to keep their wool clean and to get rid of insects on their skin. Boldwood walked across the fields to the pool， where he found the farm workers busily washing the sheep.
　　Bathsheba was standing near them，and saw Boldwood com- ing towards her. She moved away，walking beside the river， but she could hear footsteps behind her in the grass，and felt love all around her，like perfume in the air Boldwood caught up with her.
　　‘Miss Everdene！’he said quietly.
　　She trembled，turned，and said，‘Good morning. ’She had guessed the truth from the way he spoke those two words.
　　‘I feel—almost too much to think， ’he said simply. ‘My life does not belong to me any more，Miss Everdene，but to you. I've come to propose marriage to you. ’
　　Bathsheba tried not to show any expression on her face.
　　‘I'm now forty-one，’he continued. ‘I've never married，or thought I ever would marry. But we all change，and I changed when I saw you. More than anything else，I want you as my wife. ’ ‘I think，Mr Boldwood，that although I respect you very much，I don't feel—enough for you—to accept your proposal. ’
　　‘But my life is worthless without you！’he cried，calm no longer. ‘I want you-to let me say I love you，again and again！’Bathsheba remained silent. ‘I think and hope you care enough for me to listen to what I have to say！’he added.
　　Bathsheba was about to ask why he should think that，when she remembered the valentine After all，it was quite natural for him to think she admired him.
　　‘I wish I could court you with beautiful words，’the farmer went on，‘but I can only say I love you madly and want you for my wife. I wouldn't have proposed if you hadn't allowed me to hope. ’
　　‘Mr Boldwood，this is difficult for me！I'm afraid I can't marry you. I'm not in love with you！I should never have sent that valentine—forgive me—it was a thoughtless thing to do. ’
　　‘No，no，don't say it was thoughtless！Say it was the beginning of a feeling that you would like me. Just consider whether you can accept me as a husband. I know I'm too old for you，but believe me， I'll take more care of you than a younger man would. You'll have nothing to worry about. You'll have everything you want. God only knows how much you mean to me！’
　　Bathsheba's young heart was full of pity for this sensitive man who had spoken so simply and honestly.
　　‘Don't say it，don't！You feel so much，and I feel nothing，’she replied. ‘Don't discuss it any more. I can't think！Oh，I've given you such pain！’
　　‘Tell me that you don't refuse completely. Give me some hope！May I ask you again？May I think of you？’
　　‘Yes，I suppose so. ’
　　‘May I hope you will accept my proposal next time？’
　　‘No，don't hope！I must go now. Give me time to think. ’
　　‘Yes，I'll give you time，’he answered gratefully. ‘Thank you，I'm happier now. ’
　　‘No，please，don't be happier，Mr Boldwood，if happiness only comes from my agreeing！I must think. ’
　　‘I'll wait，’he agreed. They turned away from each other， and returned to their separate houses.






■ 8 Bathsheba's sheep in danger
　　Because Bathsheba was not at all in love with Farmer Boldwood，she was able to consider his proposal of marriage calmly. It was an offer which many women of good family in the area would have been delighted to accept. He was serious，respectable and rich. If she had wanted a husband，she could not have found a good reason for refusing to marry him. But she was still enjoying her new position as mistress of a farm and house，and although she respected and liked him，she did not want to marry him However she was honest enough to feel that，as she had begun the courting by sending him the valentine，she ought not to refuse him now. There was only one person whose opinion she trusted more than her own，and that person was Gabriel Oak. So the next day she decided to ask his advice. She found him with Jan Coggan，sharpening the shears which would be used to shear the sheep.
　　‘Jan，go and help Joseph with the horses，’she ordered. ‘I'll help you，Gabriel. I want to talk to you. ’
　　The shears were sharpened on a stone which was turned by a wheel，which was itself turned by a handle. Bathsheba could not manage the handle，so she held the shears while Gabriel turned the handle. ‘You aren't holding them right，miss，’he told her. ‘Let me show you how He let go of the handle，and put his large hands round hers，to hold the shears. ‘Like that，’he said，continuing to hold her hands for a peculiarly long time.
　　‘That's enough，’said Bathsheba. ‘I don't want my hands held！Turn the handle！’They went on sharpening the shears. ‘Gabriel，what do the men think about me and Mr Bold-wood？’
　　‘They say you'll marry him before the end of the year，miss. ’
　　‘What a foolish thing to say！I want you to contradict it，Gabriel. ’
　　‘Well，Bathsheba！’said Gabriel，staring at her in surprise.
　　‘Miss Everdene，you mean，’she said.
　　‘Well，if Mr Boldwood really asked you to marry him，I'm not going to contradict that，just to please you. ’
　　‘I said I wanted you just to say it wasn't true that I was going to marry him，’she said，less confidently.
　　‘I can say that，if you wish，Miss Everdene. I could also give my opinion of the way you've behaved. ’
　　He continued with his work. Bathsheba knew that he would always give his honest opinion，even if she asked him whether she should marry another man，and there was nobody else she could trust. ‘Well，what is your opinion of my behaviour？’she asked.
　　‘No good，respectable woman would behave like that，’he replied. ‘You should never have sent him that valentine. ’
　　Bathsheba blushed angrily. ‘Luckily I don't care about your opinion！Why do you think I'm not good or respectable，I wonder？Because I didn't agree to marry you，perhaps！’
　　‘Not at all. ’said Gabriel quietly. ‘I've long ago stopped thinking about that. ’
　　‘Or wishing it，I suppose，’she said，expecting him to protest that he still loved her.
　　‘Or wishing It，’repeated Gabriel calmly.
　　Bathsheba would not have minded being spoken to angrily by Gabriel for her thoughtlessness，if only he had told her he loved her. But his cold words of blame annoyed her greatly.
　　‘I cannot allow any man to accuse me of bad behaviour！’ she cried. ‘So you will leave the farm at the end of the week！’
　　‘All right，I will，’said Gabriel calmly. ‘In fact I would rather go at once. ’
　　‘Go at once then！’she replied angrily. ‘Don't let me see your face any more. ’
　　‘Very well，Miss Everdene. ’And so be took his shears and walked quietly away.
　　It was only twenty－four hours after Gabriel had left the farm that three men came running to report a disaster to Bathsheba.
　　‘Sixty of your sheep—’said Joseph Poorgrass，breathless.
　　‘Have broken through throgh the gate said Billy，also breathless.
　　‘And got into a field of young clover！’said Laban Tall.
　　‘They're eating the clover，and they're all swollen up！’
　　‘They'll all die if someone doesn't do something！’
　　‘Oh you fools！’cried Bathsheba. ‘Go straight to the field and get them out！’ She rushed towards the clover field，followed by the men. Her sheep were all lying down，their stomachs badly swollen. Joseph，Billy and Laban carried the sheep back into their own field，where the poor creatures lay helplessly without moving.
　　‘Oh，what can I do，what can I do？’cried Bathsheba.
　　‘There's only one way of saving them，’said Laban.
　　‘Soemeone must make a hole in the sheep's side，’explained Billy，‘with a special tool. Then the air comes out，and the sheep will survive. ’
　　‘Can you do it？Can I do it？’she asked wildly. ‘No，ma'am If it isn't done very carefully，the sheep will die Most shepherds can't even do it. ’ ‘Only one man in the area can do it，’said Joseph.
　　‘Who is he？Let's get him！’said his mistress.
　　‘It's Gabriel Oak. Ah，he's a clever man！’replied Joseph. ‘That's right，he certainly is，’agreed the other two. ‘How dare you say his name to me！’she said angrily.
　　‘What about Farmer Boldwood？Perhaps he can do it？’
　　‘No，ma‘am，’answered Laban. ‘When his sheep ate some clover the other day，and were swollen just like these，he sent for Cabriel at once，and Gabriel saved their lives. ’
　　‘I don't care！Don't just stand there！Go and find someone！’cried Bathsheba. The men ran off，without any clear idea where they were going，and Bathsheba was left alone with her dying sheep. ‘Never will I send for him，never！’she promised herself.
　　One of the sheep jumped high in the air，fell heavily and did not move. It was dead. Bathsheba knew she must swallow her pride，and called to Laban，who was waiting at the gate.
　　‘Take a horse，and go and find Gabriel，’she ordered. ‘Give him a message from me，that he must return at once. ’
　　Bathsheba and her men waited miserably in the field. Several more sheep jumped wildly into the air，their stomachs horribly swollen and their muscles stiff，then died. At last a rider could be seen across the fields. But it was not Gabriel，it was Laban.
　　‘He says he won't come unless you ask him politely，’Laban reported to Bathsheba.
　　‘What！’said the young woman，opening her eyes wide. Joseph Poorgrass hid behind a tree in case she became violent. ‘How dare he answer me like that！’Another sheep fell dead. The men looked very serious，and did not offer their opinion. Bathsheba's eyes filled with tears，and she did not try to hide her anger and her injured pride.
　　‘Don't cry about it，miss，’suggested Billy sympathetically.
　　‘Why not ask Gabriel in a gentler way？I'm sure he'll come then. ’ ‘Oh，he's cruel to me！’said Bathsheba，drying her eyes. ‘But I'll beg him，yes，I'll have to！’She wrote a few words quickly on a piece of paper，and at the last moment added at the bottom：
　　Gabriel，do not desert me！
　　She blushed a little as she wrote this，and gave the letter to Laban，who rode off again to find Gabriel.
　　When Gabriel arrived，Bathsheba knew from his expression which words in her note had made him come. He went straight to work on the swollen sheep，and managed to save almost all of them When he had finished，Bathsheba came to speak to him.
　　‘Gabriel，will you stay on with me？’she asked，smiling.
　　‘I will，’said Gabriel. And she smiled at him again.
　　A few days later the sheep－shearing began. The sheep were shorn every year at the beginning of June，and their wool was sold. The shearing was always done in the great barn，which had stood on the farm for four centuries. Today the sunshine poured in on the shearers. Bathsheba was watching them care－ fully to make sure that the sheep were not injured，and that all the wool was cut off Gabriel was the most experienced shearer. He loved being watched by Bathsheba，and felt warm with pride when she congratulated him on his speed.
　　But he was not happy for long Farmer Boldwood arrived at the door of the barn，and spoke to Bathsheba. They stepped outside into the bright sunlight to carry on their conversation. Gabriel could not hear what they were saying，but noticed that Bathsheba was blushing. He continued shearing，feeling sud－ denly very sad. Bathsheba went back to the house，and returned a short while later in her new green riding dress. She and Boldwood were obviously going for a ride together. As Gabriel's concentration was broken for a moment，his shears cut the sheep's skin. Bathsheba，at the door of the barn，noticed the animal jump，and saw the blood.
　　‘Oh Gabriel！’she said. ‘Be more careful！’Gabriel knew she was aware that she herself had indirectly caused the poor sheep's wound. But he bravely hid his hurt feelings，and watched Boldwood and Bathsheba ride away，feeling as sure as the other workers that the couple would soon be married.






■ 9 Bathsheba meets a handsome soldier
　　Farmers always gave a special supper to the sheep shearers when they had finished their work. This year Bathsheba had ordered her maids to put a long table in the garden，with the top end of the table just inside the house. The farm workers took their seats，and she sat at the top of the table，so that she was with them，but a little apart. There was an empty place at the bottom of the table. At first she asked Gabriel to sit there，but just then Mr Boldwood arrived， apologizing for his lateness. ‘Gabriel，’said Bathsheba，‘will you move again please， and let Mr Boldwood sit there？’Gabriel moved away in silence to another seat. They all ate and drank，and celebrated the end of the sheep－shearing by singing their favourite songs. Mr Boldwood seemed unusually cheerful，and at the end of the meal he left his seat and went to join Bathsheba at her end of the table，just inside the sitting-room . It was growing dark，but Gabriel and the other men could not avoid noticing how Boldwood looked at her. It was clear that the middle－aged farmer was deeply in love.
　　After a while Bathsheba said goodnight to her farm workers，and closed the sitting－room door and windows. Now she and Boldwood were alone. Kneeling in front of her，he took her hands.
　　‘Tell me，tell me what you've decided！’he begged. ‘I'll try to love you，’she answered in a trembling voice. ‘And if you think I'll make a good wife，I'll agree to marry you But，Mr Boldwood，any woman would hesitate before deciding on something as important as marriage. Could you wait a few weeks until I'm sure？’
　　‘I'll be away on business for five or six weeks anyway. Do you really think that by that time you will…’
　　‘I feel almost sure that when you come back，at harvest time，I'll be able to promise to marry you. But，remember，I can't promise yet. ’
　　‘I don't ask for anything more. I can wait. Goodnight， Miss Everdene！’And he left her. Bathsheba now realized how thoughtlessly she had behaved towards him，and understood how deeply he loved her. She was very sorry for her mistake and was therefore punishing herself by agreeing to marry him.
　　That evening she went round the farm as usual，lighting her lamp whenever necessary，to check that all the animals were safe. On her way back，she was walking along the narrow public path which led to her house. It was very dark there， among the trees，and she was a little surprised to hear some footsteps coming towards her. It was unfortunate that she would meet the traveller at the darkest point of the path. As she was about to pass the dark shape，something seemed to attach her skirt to the ground，and she had to stop ‘What's happened？Have I hurt you，friend？'a man asked.
　　‘No，’said Bathsheba，trying to pull her skirt away.
　　‘Ah！You're a lady！The spur on my boot has got tied up with your dress. Have you got a lamp？I'll light it for you. ’
　　The light from the lamp shone suddenly on a handsome young man in a bright red and gold army uniform. He looked admiringly at Bathsheba.
　　‘Thank you for letting me see such a beautiful face！’he said.
　　‘I didn't want to show it to you，’she said coldly， blushing. ‘Please undo your spur quickly！’He bent down to pull rather lazily at his boots. ‘You are making it even worse，’she accused him angrily，‘to keep me here longer！’
　　‘Oh no，surely not，’smiled the soldier. ‘Don't be angry. I was doing it so that I could have the pleasure of apologizing to such a lovely woman. ’ Bathsheba had no idea what to say. She wondered whether to escape by pulling the material away，but did not want to tear her best dress.
　　‘I've seen many women in my life，’continued the young man，staring into her face，‘but I've never seen a woman as beautiful as you. I don't care if you're offended，that's the truth. ’
　　‘Who are you，then，if you don't care who you offend？’
　　‘People know me in Weatherbury. My name's Sergeant Troy. Ah，you see，your skirt's free now！I wish you and I had been tied together for ever！’
　　She pulled her dress quickly away from his spurs，and ran up the path and into her house. The next day she discovered from Liddy that Sergeant Troy's supposed father was a doctor，but people said his real father was a nobleman. He had been brought up in Weatherbury，and was well known as a young soldier with a great interest in girls. Bathsheba could not remain angry for long with someone who admired her as much as he obviously did. It was unfortunate that Boldwood，when courting her，had forgotten to tell her，even once，that she was beautiful.
　　Sergeant Troy was certainly an unusual man. He lived only in the present，caring nothing for the past or the future. Because he never expected anything，he was never disappoint－ed. To men he usually told the truth，but to women，never. He was intelligent and well－educated， and proud of his success with women.
　　A week or two after the sheep－shearing，Bathsheba was in the hayfields，where her workers were cutting the hay. She was surprised to see a bright red figure appear from behind a cart. Sergeant Troy had come to help on the farm. She blushed as the young soldier came to speak to her.
　　‘Miss Everdene！’he said. ‘I didn't realize it was the “Queen of Casterbridge market”I was speaking to the other night. I apologize for expressing my feelings so strongly to you 102 then. Of course，I'm not a stranger here. I often helped your uncle on the farm，and now I'm helping you. ’
　　‘I suppose I must thank you for that，’replied the Queen of Casterbridge market rather ungratefully.
　　‘You're cross because I was honest when I spoke to you that night. But I couldn't look at you，and say you aren't beautiful！’
　　‘You are pretending，Sergeant Troy！’said Bathsheba，laughing in spite of herself at his clever way of talking.
　　‘No，Miss Everdene，you must let me say how lovely you are！What's wrong with that？’
　　‘It's wrong because—it isn't true，’she said，hesitating.
　　‘But you know that everybody notices how beautiful you are，don't you？’
　　‘Well，no—that is，I've heard Liddy say they do，but…’She paused. She had never intended to become involved in this kind of conversation with the soldier，but somehow he had trapped her into replying. Thank you for helping the men with the hay， she continued. ‘But please don't speak to me again. ’
　　‘Oh Miss Bathsheba！That's too hard！I won't be here long. I'm going back to the army in a month. ’
　　‘But you don't really care about a word from me，do you？
　　‘I do，Miss Everdene. Perhaps you think it's foolish of me to want just a “good morning”，but you have never loved a beautiful woman like yourself，as I do. ’
　　‘But you only saw me the other night！I don't believe you could fall in love so fast. I won't listen to you any more. I wish I knew what time it was. I've spent too much time with you.
　　‘Haven't you got a watch，miss？I'll give you one，’and he handed her a heavy gold watch. ‘That watch belonged to a nobleman，my father，and is all the inheritance I have. ’
　　‘But Sergeant Troy，I can't take this！It's your father’s，and so valuable！’said Bathsheba，horrified.
　　‘I loved my father，true，but I love you more. ’The young man was not pretending now，as he looked at Bathsheba's beautiful，excited face.
　　‘Can it be true，that you love me？You have seen so little of me！Please take it back！’
　　‘Wll then，I'll take it，’he said，‘because it's all I have to prove that I come of good family. But will you speak to me while I'm in Weatherbury？Will you let me work in your fields？’
　　‘Yes！Or no，I don't know！Oh，why did you come and disturb me like this！’
　　‘Perhaps，in setting a trap，I've caught myself. Such things sometimes happen. Goodbye，Miss Everdene！’
　　Blushing and almost crying，Bathsheba hurried home，whis-pering to herself，‘Oh what have I done？What does it mean？I wish I knew how much of what he says is true！






■ 10 Bathsheba in love
　　Once or twice during the next few days Bathsheba saw Troy working in her hayflelds. He behaved in a pleasant，friendly manner towards her，and she began to lose her fear of him.
　　‘Cutting your hay is harder work than sword practice！’he told her one day，a smile lighting up his handsome face.
　　‘Is it？I've never seen sword practice，’she answered.
　　‘Ah！Would you like to？’asked Troy.
　　Bathsheba hesitated. She had heard wonderful stories from people who had watched soldiers practising，stories of shining metal flashing through the air.
　　‘I would like to see it，very much. ’
　　‘Well，I'll show you. I can get a sword by this evening. Will you…’and he bent over her，whispering in her ear.
　　‘Oh no！’said Bathsheba，blushing. ‘I couldn't. ’
　　‘Surely you could？ Nobody would know. ’
　　‘Well，if I came，Liddy would have to come with me. ’
　　‘I don't see why you want to bring her，’Troy said coldly.
　　‘Well then，I won't bring her—and I'll come. But only for a very short time. ’
　　So at eight o'clock that evening，Bathsheba found herself，in spite of her doubts，climbing the hill near her house and go－ing down the other side. Now she was in what seemed like a natural theatre，a deep，round hollow in the ground . It was completely hidden from her house and the path. This was the place where Troy had asked her to meet him.
　　And Troy，in his bright red uniform，was there.
　　‘Now，he said，producing his sword，which flashed in the evening sunlight，‘let me show you. One，two，three，four. Like this！A sword can kill a man in a second. ’
　　Bathsheba saw a kind of rainbow in the air，and gasped.
　　‘How cruel and murderous！’she cried.
　　‘Yes. Now I'll pretend to fight you. You are my enemy，but the only difference from a real fight is that I'll miss you each time. Stand in front of me，and don't move！’
　　Bathsheba was beginning to enjoy this. ‘I'll just test you first，’added Troy，‘to see whether you're brave enough. ’
　　The sword flashed in the air，from her left to right side. It seemed to go through her body. But there it was again in Troy's hand，perfectly clean and free from blood.
　　‘Oh！’she cried，frightened. ‘Have you killed me？No，yon haven't！How did you do it？’
　　‘I haven't touched you，’said Troy quietly. ‘Now， you aren't afraid，are you？I promise I won't hurt you，or even touch you. ’
　　‘I don't think I'm afraid. Is the sword very sharp？’
　　‘Oh no—just stand very still. Now！’
　　In a second，Bathsheba could no longer see the sky or the ground. The shining weapon flashed above，around and in 110 front of her，catching light from the low sun and whistling as it rushed through the air. Never had Sergeant Troy managed his sword better than today.
　　‘Your hair is a little untidy，’he said. ‘Allow me，’and before she could move or speak，a curl dropped to the ground.
　　‘You are very brave，for a woman！’he congratulated her.
　　‘It was because I didn't expect it. Now I'm afraid of you，I am，really！’
　　‘This time I won't even touch your hair. I'm going to kill that insect on your dress. Stand still！’
　　Not daring to tremble，she saw the point of his sword coming towards her heart，and，sure that this time she would die，closed her eyes. But when she opened them，she saw the insect，dead，on the point of the sword.
　　‘It's magic！’she cried. ‘And how could you cut off one of my curls with a sword that isn't sharp？’
　　‘It's sharper than any knife，’he said. ‘I had to lie to you about that，to give you the confidence to stand still. ’
　　Bathsheba's feelings were almost too much for her to control，and she sat down suddenly in the grass.
　　‘I could have died，’she whispered.
　　‘You were perfectly safe，’Troy told her. ‘My sword never makes a mistake. I must leave you now. I'll keep this to re－mind me of you. ’He bent to pick up the curl of hair，which he put carefully in his pocket，next to his heart. She was not strong enough to say or do anything. He came closer，bent 112 again，and a minute later his red coat disappeared through the grass. Bathsheba blushed guiltily and tears rolled down her face. In that minute Troy had kissed her on the lips.
　　Determined，independent women often show their weakness when they fall in love，and Bathsheba had very little experi-ence of the world，or of men. It was as difficult for her to see Troy's bad qualities，which he kept carefully hidden，as to ad-mire Gabriel Oak's good ones，which were not all obvious at first sight.
　　One evening a few days later，Gabriel went to find his mis-tress. He knew that she was falling in love，and had decided to warn her of the mistake she was making. He found her walking along a path through the fields.
　　‘I was worried about your walking alone，miss，’he said.
　　‘It's rather late，and there are some bad men in the area. ’He was hoping to introduce Troy's name as one of the ‘bad men’.
　　‘I never meet any，’said Bathsheba lightly.
　　Gabriel tried again. ‘Farmer Boldwood will be taking care of you in future，of course. ’
　　‘What do you mean，Gabriel？’
　　‘Well，when you and he are married，miss，as everybody expects. You've let him court you，after all. ’
　　‘Everybody is wrong，Gabriel. I didn't promise him any－thing. I respect him，but I won't marry him. ’
　　‘I wish you had never met that young Sergeant Troy，114 miss，’be said sadly. ‘He's not good enough for you. ’
　　‘How dare you say that！He's of good family，and well－educated！’replied Bathsheba angrily.
　　‘He can't be trusted，miss. Don't trust him，I beg you. ’
　　‘He's as good as anybody in the village！He goes to church regularly！He told me so himself. ’
　　‘I'm afraid nobody has ever seen him in church. I certainly haven't. ’Cabriel's heart ached when he saw how completely Bathsheba trusted the soldier.
　　‘That's because he enters by the old tower door and sits at the back，where he can't be seen，’she replied eagerly.
　　‘You know，mistress，’said Gabriel in a deep voice full of sadness，‘that I love you and shall love you for ever. I accept that I can't marry you now that I'm poor. But Bathsheba，dear mistress，think of your position！Be careful of your behaviour towards this soldier Mr Boldwood is sixteen years older than you. Consider how well he would lood after you！’
　　‘Leave my farm，Cabriel，’said Bathsheba，her face white with anger. ‘You can't speak like that to me，your mistress！’
　　‘Don't be foolish！You've already sent me away once. How would you manage without me？No，although I'd like to have my own farm，I'll stay with you，and you know why. ’
　　‘Well，I suppose you can stay if you wish. Will you leave me here now please？I ask not as your mistress，but as a woman.
　　‘Of course，Miss Everdene，’said Gabriel gently. He was a little surprised by her request，as it was getting dark，and they were on a lonely hill some way from her house. As she moved away from him，the reason became clear. The figure of a soldier appeared on the hill and came to meet Bathsheba. Gabriel turned away and walked sadly home. On his way he passed the church，where he looked closely at the old tower door. It was covered with climbing plants，and clearly had not been used for years.
　　Half an hour later Bathsheba arrived home，with Troy's words of love still in her ears. He had kissed her a second time. Wild and feverish with excitement，she sat down imme-diately to write to Boldwood，to inform him that she could not marry him. The letter would reach him on his business trip. She was so enger to send the letter at once that she called Liddy to post it.
　　‘Liddy，tell me，’she said urgently，when her maid entered the room，promise me that Sergeant Troy isn't a bad man. Promise me that he doesn't chase girls，as people say！’
　　‘But，miss，how can I say he doesn't if he—’
　　‘Don't be so cruel，Liddy！Say you don't believe he's had！’
　　‘I don't know what to say，miss，’said Liddy，beginning to cry. ‘I'll make you angry whatever I say！’
　　‘Oh，how weak I am！How I wish I'd never seen him！You see how much I love him，Liddy！Don't tell anyone my secret，Liddy！’
　　‘I'll keep your secret，miss，’said Liddy gently.






■ 11 Farmer Boldwood becomes desperate
　　Liddy was allowed a week's holiday to visit her sister，who lived a few miles away. To avoid seeing Mr Bold－wood，Bathsheba herself arranged to visit Liddy at her sister's home for a day or two. She left her cleaning-woman，Maryann，in charge of the house，and set out on foot one evening.
　　She had walked only about two miles when she saw，coming towards her，the one man who she did not wish to see. His changed appearance showed her that he had received her letter.
　　‘Oh，is it you，Mr Boldwood？’she said，with a guilty blush.
　　‘You know how I feel about you，’he said slowly. ‘A love as strong as death. A letter cannot change that feeling. ’
　　‘Don't speak of it，’she whispered.
　　‘Then I have nothing to say. Your letter was excellently clear. We are not going to marry. ’
　　Bathsheba said confusedly，‘Good evening，’and walked on a little further. But Boldwood could not let her go.
　　‘Bathsheba—darling—is it really final？’
　　‘Indeed it is. ’
　　‘Oh Bathsheba，have pity on me！I am mad with love for you！Don't refuse me now！You turned to me，and encour－aged me，before I ever thought of you！’
　　‘What you call encouragement was a childish joke. I'm deeply sorry I sent the valentine. Must you go on reminding me of it？’
　　‘I love you too much to blame you for it！Bathsheba，you are the first woman I have ever loved. How nearly you promised to marry me！What has happened to your kindness towards me？’
　　Bathsheba looked him quietly and openly in the face and said，‘Mr Boldwood，I promised you nothing. ’
　　‘How can you be so heartless！If I had known how awfully bitter this love would be，I'd have avoided you，and been deaf to you！I tell you all this，but what do you care！’
　　Bathsheba's control was breaking. She shook her head desperately as the man's angry words rained down on her.
　　‘Forgive me，sir！I can't love as you can！’
　　‘That's not a good reason，Miss Everdene！You aren't the cold woman you're pretending to be！You're hiding the fact that you've a burning heart like mine. Your love is given to another man！’
　　He knows！she thought. He knows about Frank！
　　‘Why didn't Troy leave my darling alone？he continued fiercely. ‘Tell me honestly，if you hadn't met him，would you have accepted my proposal？’
　　She delayed her answer，but she was too honest to stay silent. ‘Yes，’she whispered.
　　‘In my absence he stole my most valuable prize from me. Now I've lost my respect and my good name，and everybody laughs at me. Marry him，go on，marry him！I would have died for you，but you have given yourself to a worthless man. Perhaps he has even kissed you！Tell me he hasn't！’
　　She was frightened of Boldwood's anger，but she answered bravely，‘He has. I'm not ashamed to speak the truth. ’
　　‘I would have given a fortune to touch your hand，’cried Boldwood wildly，‘but you have let a man like that—kiss you！One day he'll be sorry，and realize the pain he's caused me！’
　　‘Be kind to him，sir，’she cried miserably，‘because I love him so much！’
　　Boldwood was no longer listening to her. ‘I'll punish him！Sweet Bathsheba，forgive me！I've been blaming you，but it's his fault. He stole your dear heart away with his lies. When I find him，I'll fight him！Keep him away from me，Bathsbeba！’
　　The desperate man stood still for a moment，then turned and left her. Bathsheba walked up and down，crying and whispering to herself，then threw herself down by the road，exhausted. She knew that Troy was away in Bath at the moment，but would be returning to Weatherbury very soon. If he came to visit her，and Boldwood saw him，a fierce argu-ment would be the result，and Troy could be hurt. But per-haps Gabriel and Boldwood were right，and she should not see him again？If she could only see Troy now，he would help her to decide！She jumped to her feet，and hurried back along the road to Weatherbury.
　　That night Maryann，the only person sleeping in Bathsheba's house，was woken by strange noises in the field where the horses were kept. She looked out of her bedroom window just in time to see a dark figure leading Bathsheba's horse and cart out of the field. She ran to Jan Coggan's house for help. Jan and Gabriel immediately rode after the thief. After riding for some time in the dark，they finally caught up with the cart at a toll-gate.
　　‘Keep the gate closed！’shouted Gabriel to the gatekeeper.
　　‘That man's stolen the horse and cart！’
　　‘What man ？’asked the gatekeeper，puzzled.
　　Gabriel looked closely at the driver of the cart，and saw a woman—Bathsheba. She turned her face away from the light when she heard his voice，but Jan Coggan had also recognized her. She was quick to hide her surprise but not her annoyance.
　　‘Well，Gabriel，’she asked coldly，‘where are you going？’
　　‘We thought someone had stolen the horse and cart. ’
　　‘How foolish of you！Some important business made me change my plans. I'm on my way to Bath. I may visit Liddy at her sister's later. I arrived home during the night，so I didn't wake Maryann up. I Just took the horse and cart myself. Thank you for taking all this trouble，but it wasn't necessary.
　　The gatekeeper opened the gate and she passed through. Coggan and Gabriel turned their horses and rode slowly home.
　　Gabriel said，‘I think we'll keep this strange trip of hers to Bath a secret，Jan，’and Jan agreed.
　　So at first the people of Weatherbury had no idea where she had gone. She stayed away for two weeks，and there were reports that she had been seen in Bath with Sergeant Troy. Gabriel knew in his heart that this must be true. He worked as hard as ever on her farm，but all the time there was a deep ache inside him.






■ 12 Bathsheba makes her choice
　　On the same day that Bathsheba arrived home， Mr Boldwood went to apologize to her for speaking so violently the last time he had seen her. He knew nothing of her trip to Bath，and supposed she had only been to visit Liddy. But at her door he was told he could not see her，and he realized she had not forgiven him.
　　On his way home through Weatherbury he saw the coach from Bath. It stopped at the usual place，and a soldier in a red and gold uniform jumped down. Sergeant Troy picked up his bag and was about to take the road to Bathsheba's house，when Boldwood stepped forward.
　　‘Sergeant Troy？I am William Boldwood. ’
　　‘Indeed？’said Troy，showing little interest.
　　‘I want to speak to you—about two women. ’
　　Troy saw the heavy stick Boldwood was holding，and real－ized how determined he was. He decided it was worth being polite.
　　‘I'll listen with pleasure，but do speak quietly. ’
　　‘Well then，I've heard about your relationship with Fanny Robin，and I think you ought to marry her. ’
　　‘I suppose I ought. Indeed，I want to，but I cannot. ’
　　‘Why can't you？’
　　Troy was going to reply immediately，but he stopped him－self. ‘I am too poor，’he said，looking quickly at Boldwood to see if the farmer believed him. Boldwood did not notice the look.
　　‘I don't want to talk about right or wrong，I just want to discuss business with you. I was engaged to Miss Everdene，when you came and—’
　　‘Not engaged，’said Troy.
　　‘More or less engaged，’insisted Boldwood. ‘If you hadn't come，she would certainly have accepted my proposal by now. Well，her position in society is so much higher than yours that you can't hope to marry her. So all I ask is that you don't bother her any more，and marry Fanny. ’
　　‘Why should I？’asked Troy carelessly.
　　‘I'll pay you. If you leave Weatherbury today，I'll give you fifty pounds Fanny will have fifty pounds for wedding clothes，and I'll give her five hundred pounds the day she marries you. ’Boldwood's manner showed that he was a little ashamed of offering money，but he was prepared to do almost anything to prevent Troy marrying Bathsheba.
　　Troy appeared to consider the offer. ‘It's true I like Fanny best，although she's only a maid. Fifty pounds now，you said？’
　　‘Here's the money，’said Boldwood，handing the soldier a purse of gold coins.
　　‘Stop，listen！’said Troy in a whisper. Light footsteps could be heard on the road，coming from Bathsheba's house.
　　‘It's Bathsheba！She's expecting me. I must go and speak to 132 her，and say goodbye to her，as you and I have arranged. ’
　　‘Why do you need to speak to her？’
　　‘She'll look for me if I don't. Don't worry，you'll hear every word I say to her. It may help you in your courting，when I've gone！Stand over there behind the tree，and listen. ’
　　Troy stepped forward and whistled a double note.
　　‘Frank，darling，is that you？’It was Bathsheba's voice.
　　‘Oh God！’said Boldwood，unheard behind the tree.
　　‘Yes，it's me，’replied Troy.
　　‘You'rs so late，Frank，’she continued. ‘The coach arrived a long time ago！Frank，it's so lucky！There's nobody in my house except me tonight，so nobody will know about your visit. ’
　　‘Excellent，’said Troy. ‘But I'll just have to cdlect my bag，so you run home and I promise to be there in ten minutes. ’
　　‘Yes，Frank. ’She ran back to her house.
　　Troy turned to Boldwood，who had stepped out from behind the tree，his face white and his whole body trembling.
　　‘Shall I tell her I cannot marry her？’laughed the soldier.
　　‘No，no，wait！I have more to say to you！whispered Boldwood，the muscles in his face strangely out of control.
　　‘Now，’said Troy，‘you see my problem. I can't marry them both. But I have two reasons for choosing Fanny. First，I like her best，I think，and second，you're paying me for it. ’
　　At that moment Boldwood lost control. He attacked Troy fiercely，holding his neck with botn hands.
　　‘Wait，’gasped Troy，who had not expected this，‘let me breathe！If you kill me，you injure the woman you love！’
　　‘What do you mean？’cried the farmer. ‘I should kill you like a dog！’But he let go of Troy's neck，and listened.
　　‘You heard how Bathsheba loves me and expects me to visit her tonight Soon the whole village will know this. The only way to save her good name，and her position in Weatherbury，is for me to marry her. ’
　　‘True，true，’agreed Boldwood after a pause. ‘Troy，marry her！Poor，weak woman！She must love you madly to give herself so completely to you！’
　　‘But what about Fanny？’asked the soldier cleverly.
　　‘Don't desert her，Troy，I beg you！I don't mean Fanny，I'm speaking of Bathsheba！How can I persuade you？I know！I'll pay you five hundred pounds on the day you marry Bathsheba！’
　　Troy was secretly shocked at Boldwood's wild offer.
　　‘And I'll receive something now as well？’he asked.
　　‘Yes，all the money I have with me！’He counted the coins in his pocket. ‘Twenty－one pounds—it's all for you！’
　　‘Give me the money，and we'll go to her house. I'll ask her to marry me. Of course I won't say anything about the money. ’
　　They went along the road to the farmhouse，and Boldwood waited outside while Troy entered. He returned in a moment with a piece cut out of a Bath newspaper.
　　‘Here，read this first，’he said，smiling. And Boldwood read：
　　MARRIAGES：On the 17th，in Bath，Frank Troy，Sergeant，to Bathsheba Everdene of Weatherbury.
　　The paper fell from Boldwood's hands，as the soldier began to laugh. ‘Fifty pounds to marry Fanny. Twenty－one pounds not to marry Fanny，but Bathsheba. And now you see I'm already Bathsheba's husband. You're a fool，Boldwood. Although I may be a bad man，I'd never bribe anyone to mar-ry，as you've tried to. And Fanny？She left me long ago，and I don't know where she is. I've searched everywhere for her. Now take your money back！I don't want it！’and Troy threw the gold coins into the road.
　　‘You black－hearted dog！I'll punish you one day，remember that！’cried the broken man. Troy laughed loudly as he closed Bathsheba's front door.
　　Through the whole of the long night that followed，Boldwood's dark figure could be seen walking over the hills of Weatherbury like a ghost.
　　Just before the clock struck five the next morning，Gabriel and Coggan were walking to the hayfields past their mistress's house，when they saw a surprising sight. Bathsheba's bedroom window was open，and looking out of it was a hand-some man，with his red jacket undone. It was Sergeant Troy.
　　‘She's married him！’whispered Coggan. Gabriel said nothing，but he felt so ill that he had to rest on the gate for a moment. He thought with pity of her future，as he knew her marriage to Troy could not be happy for long.
　　‘Good morning，friends！’shouted Troy cheerfully to the men.
　　‘We must be polite to him，’whispered Coggan，‘if he's married the mistress. ’
　　‘Good morning，Sergeant Troy，’said Gabriel miserably.
　　‘Now that I've left the army，I'll soon be down in the fields with you again，’said Troy lightly. ‘My new position won't change that，and I'll be friendly with you all，just as before. Drink to my health，men. ’And he threw a coin towards Gabriel，who refused to pick it up. Coggan，however，put it in his pocket.
　　As they went on their way，they noticed Mr Boldwood riding past them. Gabriel forgot his own sadness when he saw the bitterness and deep despair on the farmer's face.






■ 13 The storm
　　There was always a harvest supper for the farm workers after all the hay and wheat had been cut. On behalf of his wife，Sergeant Troy decided to have it one evening at the end of August，in the great barn. The weather was unpleas-antly warm that night. On his way to the harvest supper Gabriel stopped to check the eight huge hay－and wheat－ricks. If，as he suspected，there was a storm，the ricks，which were all uncovered，would be badly damaged.
　　He went on to the barn，where the farm workers had already finished eating and started dancing. Gabriel had to wait until Sergeant Troy had finished his dance with Bathshe-ba before he could warn him about possible damage to the ricks. Troy，however，was enjoying himself too much to listen to Gabriel's message.
　　‘Friends，’he was saying，‘I've ordered brandy to be served to you all，so that we can celebrate my wedding properly. ’
　　‘No，Frank，don't give them brandy，’begged Bathsheba，‘it will only do them harm！’
　　‘Don't be silly！’said Troy. ‘Friends，let's send the women home！Then we men can drink and sing as much as we like！’Angrily，Bathsheba left the barn，followed by the other women.
　　Gabriel left soon afterwards Later，when he went to check that Bathsheba's sheep were safe，he noticed that they looked very frightened. They were crowded together in a corner，their tails pointing the same way. To the shepherd this meant they were expecting a storm. He went to look at the ricks again. Should the whole harvest of the farm，worth at least seven hundred and fifty pounds，be lost because of a woman's weakness？Never，if I can prevent it！thought Gabriel.
　　He returned to the barn to ask the other farm workers to help him cover the ricks. But the only noise he could hear coming from the barn was the men's loud and regular breathing，and when he entered，he found them all asleep，in-cluding Troy. The brandy，which they had been too polite to refuse，had made them drunk in a very short time，as they were not used to drinking anything stronger than beer. It was useless trying to wake them.
　　Gabriel left the barn，and returned to the ricks，two of which he managed to cover with the heavy material kept on the farm for this purpose. The only way to cover the other six ricks was by thatching them with straw，and this was a long and difficult job to do alone.
　　The moon disappeared，and there was a slow，light wind，like the breath of a dying man，as Gabriel climbed the ladder and started thatching high up on top of the third rick. Light－ning flashed in the sky，and there was a loud crash of thunder. In the sudden brightness Gabriel could see every tree around him，until the light disappeared just as suddenly，leaving him in the blackest darkness. He knew his position was dangerous，but considered his life was not valuable enough to worry about.
　　Another flash of lightning allowed him to see the figure of a woman running towards the rick. Was it Bathsheba？
　　‘Is that you，ma'am？’he called to the darkness.
　　‘Who's there？’said Bathsheba's voice.
　　‘It's Gabriel. I'm on the rick，thatching. ’
　　‘Oh Gabriel！I'm so worried about the ricks！Can we save them？The thunder woke me. I can't find my husband. Is he there？’
　　‘No，he isn't. He's—asleep in the barn. ’
　　‘He promised me the ricks would be covered，and he hasn't done it！Can I help you？Let me help！’
　　‘You can bring the straw up to me in armfuls，if you aren't afraid to climb the ladder in the dark，’said Gabriel.
　　‘I'll do anything to help！’she said. She started to go up and down the ladder，carrying the straw. In the brightness of the lightning Gabriel saw their two shadows，wildly enlarged，on the hill in front of him. Then came the loudest crash so far.
　　‘How terrible！’cried Bathsheba，and held on to his arm. The lightning flashed in a wild dance of death，and thunder came from every part of the huge sky. Bathsheba and Gabriel could only stare，and tremble at the strange and dangerous beauty of the storm.
　　As they watched，a tall tree in front of them seemed to be burning with a white flame. There was a final，violent crash of thunder，and in the bright light they saw that the tree had been torn in half by the lightning.
　　‘That was close to us！’said Gabriel. ‘We'd better go down. ’They climbed down and stood together in the darkness，Bathsheba seeming to think only of the storm，Gabriel thinking only of her.
　　At last he said，‘The storm appears to have passed，but the rain will be coming soon. I'll go up and finish thatching the ricks. ’
　　‘Gabriel，you are kind to me！Oh why aren't the others here？Don't tell me，I know. They're all drunk in the barn，aren't they？It was my husband's fault. Gabriel，I want to tell you something. ’The soft flashes of the dying lightning showed her face，very white against the black sky. ‘I care about your good opinion of me，so I want to explain why I went to Bath that night. It wasn't to marry Troy，it was to break off my relationship with him. Perhaps you wonder why I married him then？Well，I suppose I must tell you. It was because he told me he had seen a woman more beautiful than me，and said that if I wanted him as a husband，I must marry him at once！I was wild with love and jealousy，so I married him！’Gabriel did not reply.
　　‘I'll bring some more straw up to you，shall I？’she offered.
　　She made several more journeys before he noticed her tired－ness. ‘I think you'd better go indoors now，’he said，as gently as a mother. ‘I'll finish the work alone. ’
　　‘If I'm useless，I'll go，’said Bathsheba. ‘But，oh，if you fell…！’
　　‘You aren't useless，but you're tired. You've done well. ’
　　‘And you've done better，’she said gratefully. ‘Thank you a thousand times，Gabriel！Goodnight. ’
　　She disappeared in the darkness. He went on thatching in a kind of dream. She had spoken more warmly to him tonight than she had ever done when she was unmarried and free to speak as warmly as she liked.
　　The wind changed and became stronger. At the same time heavy rain started falling. As Gabriel worked on the top of the ricks，he suddenly remembered that，eight months before，he had been fighting against fire in the same place as desperately as he was fighting against water now—and for love of the same woman，who did not love him.
　　It was not until seven o'clock in the morning that Gabriel climbed down from the last rick，exhausted and wet to the skin. He noticed figures coming out of the barn，walking slowly and painfully to their homes. They all looked ashamed except Troy，who was whistling cheerfully as he entered the farmhouse. None of them thought of looking at the ricks.
　　On his way back to Coggan's house，Gabriel met Boldwood.
　　‘How are you，sir？’asked Gabriel.
　　150
　　‘Yes，it's a wet day. Oh，I'm very well，thank you. ’
　　‘You look a little different，sir. ’
　　‘No，you're wrong，Oak. I'm just the same. Nothing hurts me. But you look tired. ’
　　‘I've been working all night to get our ricks covered. Never worked so hard in my life！Yours are safe of course，sir？’
　　‘Oh yes. ’Boldwood added after a silence，‘What did you ask？’
　　‘Your ricks are all covered？’
　　‘No，none of them. I forgot to tell the men to thatch them. I expect most of my wheat will be destroyed in this rain. ’
　　‘Forgot，’repeated Gabriel to himself. It was difficult to believe that the most careful farmer in the area would lose all his harvest because of a moment's forgetfulness. This would never have happened before Boldwood fell in love with Bathsheba.
　　Boldwood clearly wanted to talk，although it was still raining heavily. ‘Oak，you knew I wanted to get married. ’
　　‘I thought my mistress was going to marry you，’said Gabriel sympathetically. ‘However，nothing that we expect ever happens. ’
　　He spoke with the calmness of a man used to disaster.
　　‘Perhaps the villagers laugh at me，’said Boldwood with a pretended lightness.
　　‘Oh no，I don't think so. ’
　　‘But the truth is that we were never engaged，so she never broke off the engagement，you see. ’But Boldwood could not remain calm. ‘Oh Gabriel，’he said wildly，‘I'm weak and foolish，and I feel it's better to die than to live！’After a silence，he continued more normally. ‘I've accepted the fact of her refusal now. I'm sorry，of course，but no woman has ever controlled my life. Well，good morning. ’






■ 14 Bathsheba discovers the truth
　　Summer turned into autumn and one Saturday evening in October Bathsheba and her husband were riding home from Casterbridge market.
　　‘Yes，if it hadn't rained so hard，I'd have won two hundred pounds easily，my love，’Troy was saying. ‘The horse I put my money on fell over in the mud，you see. Such bad luck！’
　　‘But Frank，’said Bathsheba miserably，‘do you realize you've lost more than a hundred pounds in a month with this awful horse-racing？It's foolish of you to spend my money like that！You'll promise not to go to the next race，on Monday，won't you？’
　　‘It doesn't matter whether I go or not. I've already put money on an excellent horse in the Monday race. Don't cry，Bathsheba！If I'd known you were so cautious，I'd never have—’
　　He did not finish what he was saying. Just then they noticed a woman walking towards them. Although it was almost dark，they could see that she was poorly dressed.
　　‘Please，sir，do you know what time the Casterbridge workhouse closes？’she asked in a voice of extreme sadness.
　　Troy jumped in surprise，but kept his face turned away from her before replying，‘I don't know. ’
　　When the woman hear him speak，and looked up to his face，her expression showed both pain and happiness. She gave a cry，and fell to the ground，unconscious.
　　‘Oh poor thing！’cried Bathsheba. ‘I'll help her！’
　　‘No，stay on your horse，and take mine！’ordered Troy，jumping down. ‘Take the horses to the top of the hill. ’
　　Bathsheba obeyed，and moved away. Troy lifted up the woman.
　　‘I thought you were far away，or dead！’he told her，in a strangely gentle voice. ‘Why didn't you write to me，Fanny？’
　　‘I was afraid to. ’
　　‘Have you any money？No？Here's all I have，it's not much. I can't ask my wife for any more at the moment. ’The woman said nothing. ’Listen，’continued Troy，‘I'll have to leave you now. You're going to the Casterbridge workhouse？Well，stay there for tonight and tomorrow anyway，but I'll find somewhere better for you. I'll meet you on Monday morning at ten o'clock on the bridge just outside town. I'll bring you all the money I can. Goodbye！’
　　At the top of the hill Bathsheba turned and saw the woman walking slowly on towards Casterbridge. Troy soon caught up with his wife. He looked very upset.
　　‘Who is that woman？Bathsheba looked closely into his face.
　　‘She's not important to either of us，’he replied coldly.
　　‘I think you know her，’Bathsheba went on.
　　‘I don't care what you think！’he answered，and they continued their ride in silence.
　　The two miles to Casterbridge seemed a very long way to the woman，who was tired and ill. Sometimes she walked，sometimes she rested a little，beside the road. All through the night her eyes were fixed on the lights of Casterbridge，the end of her journey. At six o'clock the next morning she finally fell in front of the door of the workhouse，and the people there took her in.
　　Bathsheba and her husband did not speak much that evening，or the following day. But on Sunday evening Troy said suddenly，‘Bathsheba，could you let me have twenty pounds？I need it. ’
　　‘Ah！’she said sadly，‘for the races tomorrow. Oh，Frank，only a few weeks ago you said I was far sweeter than all your other pleasures！Now won't you stop risking money on horses，which is more a worry than a pleasure？Say yes to your wife，Frank，say yes！’Her beautiful face would have persuaded most men，including Troy if he had not been married to her，but he no longer loved her enough to agree to anything she wanted.
　　‘Well，the money isn't for racing anyway，’he said. ‘Don't keep me short of money，Bathsheba，or you'll be sorry. ’
　　‘I'm sorry already，’she replied，‘sorry that our love has come to an end. ’
　　‘Love always ends after marriage. I think you hate me. ’
　　‘No，not you. I only hate your faults. ’
　　‘Then why not help me to improve？Come，let's be friends. Just give me the twenty pounds. ’
　　‘Well，here's the money. Take it. ’
　　‘Thank you. I expect I'll be away before breakfast tomor-row. ’
　　‘Must you go，Frank？Stay with me！There was a time when you used to call me darling. Now you don't care how I spend my time. ’
　　‘I must go，’said Troy，taking out his watch. He opened the back of the watch case，and Bathsheba，who happened to be looking，saw that there was a curl of hair hidden inside.
　　‘Oh Frank！’she gasped. ‘A woman's hair！Whose is it？’
　　Troy closed the watch immediately and replied carelessly，‘Why，yours of course. I'd quite forgotten I had it. ’
　　‘You're lying，Frank. It's yellow hair. Mine is darker. ’
　　‘Well，all right，if I must tell you，it's the hair of a young woman I was going to marry before I met you. ’
　　‘Tell me her name！Is she married？’
　　‘I can't tell you her name，but she's single. ’
　　‘Is she alive？Is she pretty？’
　　‘Yes to both questions. ’
　　‘How can she be pretty，poor thing，with hair that colour？’
　　‘Her hair has been admired by everybody who's seen her. It's beautiful hair！Don't be jealous，Bathsheba！You shouldn't have married me if you didn't trust me！’
　　‘This is all I get for loving you so much！’cried Bathsheba bitterly. ‘I would have died for you when I married you，and now you laugh at my foolishness in marrying you！But you'll burn that hair，won't you，Frank，to please me？’
　　Troy only answered，‘I have a duty to someone in my past. Mistakes were made which I must put right. That's more important than my relationship with you. If you're sorry you married me，well，so am I！’
　　‘Frank，I'm only sorry if you love another woman more than me，’said Bathsheba in a trembling voice. ‘You like the woman with that pretty hair. Yes，it is pretty！Was she the woman we met on the road last night？’
　　‘Well，yes. Now you know the truth，I hope you're happy. ’
　　‘You haven't told me everything. Tell me the whole truth，’she said，looking bravely into his face. ‘I never thought I'd beg a man to do anything，but my pride has all gone！’
　　‘Don't be so desperate！’said Troy crossly. He left the room.
　　Bathsheba was in deep despair. She knew that she had lost her independence as a woman，which she had been so proud of. She hated herself for falling in love so easily with her hand-some husband，who，she now realized，could not be trusted.
　　The next morning Troy left the house early. Bathsheba was walking in her garden，when she noticed Gabriel Oak and Mr Boldwood deep in conversation in the road. They called to Joseph Poorgrass，who was picking apples，and soon he came along the path to Bathsheba's house.
　　‘Well，what's the message，Joseph？’she asked，curious.
　　‘I'm afraid Fanny Robin's dead，ma'am. Dead in the Casterbridge workhouse.
　　‘No！Why？What did she die from？’
　　‘I don't know，ma'am，but she was never very strong. Mr Boldwood is sending a cart to bring her back to be buried here. ’
　　‘Oh，I won't let Mr Boldwood do that！Fanny was my uncle's maid，and mine too How very sad to die in a work-house！Tell Mr Boldwood that you will drive my new cart over to Casterbridge this afternoon to fetch her body. And Joseph，put flowers on the cart for poor Fanny. How long was she in the workhouse？’
　　‘Only a day，ma'am. She arrived，ill and exhausted，on Sunday morning. She came on foot through Weatherbury. ’
　　The colour left Bathsheba's face at one. ‘Along the road from Weatherbury to Casterbridge？’she asked eagerly. ‘When did she pass Weatherbury？’
　　‘Last Saturday night it was，ma'am. ’
　　‘Thank you，Joseph，you may go. ’
　　Later that afternoon Bathsheba asked Liddy，‘What was the colour of poor Fanny Robin's hair？I only saw her for a day or two. ’
　　‘She used to keep it covered，but it was lovely golden hair，ma'am. ’
　　‘Her young man was a soldier，wasn't he？’
　　‘Yes，and Mr Troy knows him well. ’
　　‘What？Mr Troy told you that？’
　　‘Yes. One day I asked him if he knew Fanny's young man，and he said he knew him as well as he knew himself！’
　　‘That's enough，Liddy！’said Bathsheba，her anxiety mak-ing her unusually cross.






■ 15 Fanny's revenge
　　That afternoon Joseph Poorgrass was bringing Fanny's coffin back from Casterbridge. Feeling a little frightened of the dead body behind him in the cart，and de-pressed by the autumn fog，he stopped for some beer at a pub，where he met Jan Coggan and Laban Tall. There Gabriel Oak found the three men，completely drunk，two hours later. As Joseph was clearly incapable of driving the cart，Gabriel drove it to Weatherbury himself. On the way into the village，the vicar stopped him.
　　‘I'm afraid it's too late now for the burial，’he said，‘but I can arrange for the body to be buried tomorrow. ’
　　‘I could take the coffin to the church for the night，sir，’offered Gabriel，hoping to prevent Bathsheba from seeing it.
　　But just then Bathsheba herself appeared. ‘No，Gabriel，’she said. ‘Poor Fanny must rest in her old home for her last night. Bring the coffin into the house. ’
　　The coffin was carried into a small sitting-room and Gabriel was left alone with it. In spite of all his care，the worst had happened，and Bathsheba was about to make a terrible discovery. But suddenly he had an idea. He looked at the words written simply on the coffin lid—Fanny Robin and child. With a cloth Gabriel carefully removed the last two words. Quietly he left the room.
　　Bathsheba was in a strange mood. She felt lonely and miser-able，but she had not stopped loving her husband，in spite of her anxiety about his past. She was waiting for him to come home，when Liddy knocked and entered.
　　‘Ma'am，Maryann has just heard something…’she hesitated a little. ‘Not about you or us，ma'am. About Fanny. There's a story in Weatherbury that…’Liddy whis-pered in her mistress's ear.
　　Bathsheba trembled from head to foot.
　　‘I don't believe it！’she cried. ‘There's only one name on the coffin lid！But I suppose it could be true. ’
　　She said no more，and Liddy went quietly out of the room. Bathsheba felt almost sure she knew the truth about Fanny and Troy，but she wanted to be certain. She entered the sitting-room where the coffin lay. Holding her hot hands to her fore-head she cried，‘Tell me your secret，Fanny！I hope it isn't true there are two of you！If I could only look. at you，I'd know！’
　　After a pause，she added slowly，‘And I will. ’
　　A few moments later，she stood beside the uncovered coffin. Staring in，she said，‘It was best to know the worst，and I know it now！’Her tears fell fast beside the dead pair in the coffin，tears for Fanny and for herself. Although Bathsheba，not Fanny，had married Troy，in death Fanny was the winner. She was taking her revenge now on Bathsheba for the difficulties she had experienced in her life.
　　Bathsheba forgot the passing of time as she looked at Fanny's cold white face and yellow hair，and did not realize Troy had arrived home. He threw open the door and came in. He did not guess who was in the coffin.
　　‘What's the matter？Who's dead？’he asked.
　　Bathsheba tried to push past him. ‘Let me out！’she cried.
　　‘No，stay，I insist！’He held her arm and together they looked into the coffin.
　　Troy stood completely still when he saw the mother and ba-by. Little by little his shoulders bent forward，and his face showed deep sadness. Bathsheba was watching his expression closely，and she had never been more miserable. Slowly Troy knelt to give Fanny Robin a gentle kiss.
　　Bathsheba threw her arms round his neck，crying wildly from the depths of her heart，‘Don't，don't kiss them！Oh Frank，no！I love you better than she did！Kiss me too，Frank！You will kiss me too，Frank！’
　　Troy looked puzzled for a moment，not expecting this child-like cry from his proud wife. But then he pushed her away.
　　‘I will not kiss you！’he said.
　　‘Can you give me a reason？’asked Bathsheba，fighting to control herself. Perhaps it was unfortunate that she asked.
　　‘I've been a bad，black-hearted man，but this woman，dead as she is，is more to me than you ever were，or are，or can be. I would have married her，if I'd never seen your beau-tiful face！And I wish I had married her！’He turned to Fanny. ‘But never mind，darling，’he said，‘in the sight of God you are my wife！’
　　At these words a long，low cry of despair and anger came from Bathsheba's lips. ‘If she's—that，what—am I？’
　　‘You are nothing to me，nothing，’said Troy heartlessly. ‘A ceremony in front of a vicar doesn't make a marriage. I don't consider myself your husband. ’
　　Bathsheba wanted only to get away from him and his words. She ran straight out of the house. She stayed out all night，wrapped in a cloak，waiting for the coffin to be taken for burial. As soon as the men had taken it away the next morning，she re-entered the house，very cautiously to avoid Troy，but her husband had gone out very early and did not return.






■ 16 Sergeant Troy leaves
　　When Bathsheba ran out of the house the previous night，Troy first replaced the coffin lid，then went upstairs to lie on his bed and wait miserably for the morning.
　　The day before，on Monday，he had waited for Fanny，as arranged，on the bridge just outside Casterbridge，for over an hour. He had Bathsheba's twenty pounds and seven pounds of his own to give Fanny. When she did not come，he became angry，remembering the last time she had failed to arrive，on her wedding day. In fact she was at that moment being put in her coffin at the workhouse，but he did not know that. He rode straight to the races at Budmouth and stayed there all afternoon. But he was still thinking of Fanny，and he did not risk any money on the horses. Only on his way home did he suddenly realize that illness could have prevented her from meeting him，and only when he entered the farmhouse that evening did he discover that she was dead.
　　On Tuesday morning Troy got up and，without even thinking about Bathsheba，went straight to the churchyard to find the position of Fanny's grave. He continued on foot to Casterbridge to order the best gravestone available for twenty-seven pounds，which was all the money he had. Having ar-ranged for it to be put on the grave that afternoon，he returned to Weatherbury in the evening，with a basket of flowering plants. The new gravestone was already in place，and he worked solidly for several hours in the churchyard，putting the plants carefully into the soft earth of her grave. When it start- ed raining，however，he decided to spend the rest of the night in the shelter of the church，and finish his planting in the morning.
　　The rain that night was unusually heavy，and water began to pour from a broken pipe on the church roof straight on to Fanny's grave. As the earth there had only recently been dug，the grave became a kind of muddy pool. Soon the plants were floating on top of the grave，and then were washed away in the stream of water flowing through the churchyard.
　　When Troy woke up，stiff and still tired，he went out of the church to finish work on the grave. The rain had stopped，and the sun was shining through the red and gold autumn leaves. The air was warm and clear. As Troy walked along the path，he noticed it was very muddy，and covered with plants. Surely these could not be the ones he had planted？He turned the corner and saw the damage the heavy rain had done.
　　The new gravestone was stained with mud，and there was a shallow hole in the grave，where the water had poured in. Nearly all the plants had been washed out of the grave.
　　This strange accident had a worse effect on Troy than any of his troubles，worse even than Fanny's death. He had tried to show his love for her，knowing that he had failed to do so when she was alive. Planting the flowers was also a way of softening his feelings of sadness and guilt at her death. And now his work had been destroyed！He was too depressed to start work on the grave again. He left it as it was，and went silently out of the churchyard A minute later he had left the village.
　　Meanwhile Bathsheba had spent a day and a night as a willing prisoner in a small bedroom in her house. Except when Liddy brought her food or messages，she kept the bedroom door locked so that her husband could not come in Liddy knew there was trouble between husband and wife，but did not know the reason. On Wednesday morning she brought breakfast up to Bathsheba.
　　‘What heavy rain we had in the night，ma'am！’she said.
　　‘Yes，and there was a strange noise from the churchyard. ’
　　‘Gabriel thinks it was water from a broken pipe on the church roof，and he's gone there to see. Are you going to the churchyard，ma'am，to look at Fanny's grave？’
　　‘Did Mr Troy come in last night？’Bathsheba asked anxiously.
　　‘No，ma'am，he didn't. And Laban Tall says he saw Mr Troy walking out of the village towards Budmouth，’replied Liddy.
　　Budmouth，thirteen miles away！At once Bathsheba's heart felt lighter. ‘Yes，Liddy，I need some fresh air. I'll go to see Fanny's grave，’she said，and after breakfast she walked almost cheerfully to the churchyard.
　　She saw the hole in the grave and the expensive new grave-stone，but did not think it could be Fanny's. She looked round for a plain grave. Then she noticed Gabriel reading the words on the gravestone，and her eyes followed his：
　　This stone was put up by Francis Troy in loving memory
　　of Fanny Robin，who died on October 9，1866，aged 20
　　Gabriel looked anxiously at her to see if she was upset，but she remained calm. She asked him to fill in the hole，and have the broken water pipe repaired. Finally，to show she did not hate the woman who had caused her such bitterness，she replanted the flowers herself，and cleaned the muddy grave-stone，so that the words could be read clearly. Then she went home.
　　Troy，meanwhile，was walking towards the south. He could not decide what to do next. All he knew was that he had to get away from Weatherbury. At the top of a hill he saw the sea，stretching for miles in front of him. Now he felt more cheerful，and decided to swim. So he climbed down the cliffs，undressed on the beach and jumped into the sea. The water was so smooth that he swam confidently out to where it was very deep. Here he was surprised and a little frightened to find that he was being carried further out to sea. He suddenly remembered that the Budmouth coast was famous for the num-ber of swimmers drowned there every year，and he began to be afraid that he would soon be one of them. However strongly he swam，the sea pulled him further away from the coast，and he was already beginning to feel tired and breathless. Just then he saw a small boat moving out to sea，towards a ship. With his right arm he swam，and with his left he waved wildly，shouting as loudly as he could. The sailors saw him at once，and rowed over to rescue him.






■ 17 Farmer Boldwood begins to hope
　　When Troy did not return，Bathsheba felt neither happiness nor sadness. She had no hope for the fu-ture. She was sure that one day he would return，and spend the rest of her money. Then they would have to sell the farm. She could do nothing to prevent it.
　　One Saturday at Casterbridge market，a stranger came up to her. ‘I must tell you，ma'am，’he said，‘your husband is dead. ’
　　‘No，it can't be true！’gasped Bathsheba. Darkness came over her eyes，and she fell. But not to the ground. Boldwood，who had been standing in a corner watching her，ran forward to catch her.
　　‘Tell me more，’he said to the stranger，as he held the unconscious girl gently in his arms.
　　‘The police found her husband's clothes on the beach. He must have been swimming，and drowned off the Budmouth coast. ’
　　There was a strange excitement in Boldwood's face，but he said nothing. He carried her to a private room at the hotel，where she could rest until she felt well enough to ride home.
　　When she arrived home，still feeling weak and confused，Liddy had already heard the news. ‘Shall we get some black clothes made for you，ma'am？’said the maid，hesitating a little.
　　‘No，Liddy. It isn't necessary. You see，I think he may still be alive. I feel—I think I'm sure he's alive！’
　　But the following Monday Troy's death was reported in the local newspaper. A witness had seen him in deep water，shouting and waving for help. And when his clothes and his watch，found on the beach，were delivered to the farmhouse，Bathsheba began to doubt that he was alive. She opened the back of his watch case and took out the curl of golden hair.
　　‘He was Fanny's and she was his，’she said to herself. ‘They should be together. I mean nothing to either of them. Why should I keep her hair？’She held the curl over the fire. ‘No，I won't burn it，I'll keep it in memory of her，poor thing！’
　　Through the autumn and winter Bathsheba's life was more peaceful She no longer took such an interest in the farm，and very sensibly appointed Gabriel Oak her farm manager. He had already been doing the job unofficially，and now would be paid for it. At last his good qualities were being recognized. Gabriel's luck had certainly changed. Boldwood could not concentrate on farming these days either. His wheat and hay had all been so damaged by the rain that it was worthless. Weatherbury people were shocked by the changes they had no-ticed recently in Farmer Boldwood. Soon he himself realized that something must be done，and arranged for Gabriel to manage his farm too. So Gabriel was responsible for both the important farms in the area，while their owners sat alone in their lonely farmhouses.
　　After a time Boldwood started to hope that one day，if Bathsheba remarried at all，she would marry him. He tried to maintain a friendly，businesslike relationship with her，keeping his love for her out of sight，until the right moment came to propose again. He had no idea how long he would have to wait to marry her，but he was prepared to wait for the rest of his life.
　　The right moment did not come until the following summer when most of the Weatherbury people attended the great sheep fair at. Greenhill. Gabriel was there with Bathsheba's and Boldwood's sheep，and so were both his employers. This year a travelling circus put up its tent and offered the public a horse-riding show. Most of Bathsheba's farm workers were already in the tent，when Bathsheba herself arrived to see the show. At the back of the tent，behind a curtain，were the circus riders，and one of them，pulling on his boots，was Sergeant Troy.
　　After being rescued，Troy had decided to stay on the ship and work as a sailor，but he was not happy with this travelling life，and finally returned to England. He hesitated to go back to Bathsheba and a comfortable life on the farm. Perhaps Bathsheba would fail at farming and then he would be respon-sible for her. And anyway，perhaps she would not welcome him back. For the moment he was working as actor and horse-rider with the circus. So it was with no plans for the future that Troy found himself at Greenhill fair，dangerously close to Weatherbury.
　　When he looked through a hole in the curtain to see the audience，he was horrified to see his wife. She looked more beautiful than he remembered. Perhaps she would laugh at him，a nobleman's son，working in a circus！As he rode into the tent，he was careful to keep his face away from her，and remain wrapped in his cloak. She did not seem to recognize him.
　　When the show was over，Troy went out into the darkness. In the large tent where meals and drinks were being served，he saw Bathsheba talking to a man. Was she forgetting her husband so soon？thought Troy angrily. He decided to listen to their conversation，and knelt down outside the tent，making a little hole with his knife in the heavy cotton so that he could see the two people inside.
　　She was drinking a cup of tea，which Boldwood had just brought her. Troy watched her every movement. She was as handsome as ever，and she belonged to him. After a few moments Troy got up and walked slowly from the tent. He was considering what to do next.
　　Meanwhile Boldwood had offered to ride back to Weather-bury with Bathsheba，as it was getting late，and she accepted. Her pity for the man she had hurt so deeply made her behave more kindly towards him than was perhaps sensible. Her kind-ness made poor Boldwood dream of their future marriage，and suddenly，unable to stop himself，he said，‘Mrs Troy，will you marry again some day？’
　　‘You forget that my husband's death has never been proved，so I may not really be a widow，’she said，confused. ‘I've a feeling he's alive，and I'm not thinking of marrying anyone else. ’
　　‘Do you know，Bathsheba，that according to the lawyers，you can remarry seven years after your husband's supposed death，that is，six years from now？Could you—promise to marry me then？’
　　‘I don't know. Six years is too far away. I'm bitterly sorry I behaved so stupidly towards you，but—I can promise I'll never marry another man while you want me to be your wife，but—’
　　‘You could put right the mistake you made by promising to be my wife in six years’time！’There was wild hope in his eyes.
　　‘Oh，what shall I do？I don't love you，but if I can give you happiness by just promising，then I will—consider—and promise—soon. Shall we say，by Christmas？’
　　‘You'll promise at Christmas. Well，I'll say no more. ’
　　As Christmas came nearer，Bathsheba became more anxious，and one day she confessed her difficulty to Gabriel.
　　‘The saddest reason of all for agreeing to his proposal，’she said，‘is that if I don't，I'm afraid he'll go mad. His feelings are so extreme. I don't say that because I'm vain，but I believe I hold that man's future in my hands. Oh Gabriel，it's a terrible worry！’
　　‘Then why don't you promise，ma'am？I don't think people would think it wrong. The only thing that makes it wrong in my view is that you don't love him. ’
　　‘That is my punishment，Gabriel，for playing that foolish trick with the valentine on him. ’Gabriel had given her a reasonable，sensible answer，as she knew he would，but she felt annoyed with his cool advice. Not once had he spoken of his love for her，or said that he could wait for her too. She would have refused him of course，but at least it would have shown that he still admired her.






■ 18 Mr Boldwood's Christmas party
　　For months Weatherbury people had been discussing the party that Mr Boldwood was going to give just before Christmas，and now the day had finally arrived. Bathsheba was getting ready for it.
　　‘I'm upset，Liddy，it's foolish of me，I know，’she said. ‘I wish I didn't have to go to the party. I haven't spoken to Mr Boldwood since the autumn，when I promised to see him at Christmas，so I'll have to go. My black silk dress，please. ’
　　‘Surely you don't need to wear black tonight，ma'am？You've been a widow for fourteen months now. That's a long time. ’
　　‘No，if I wear a bright dress，people will say I'm encouraging Mr Boldwood. How do I look，Liddy？’
　　‘I've hardly ever seen you look so lovely，ma'am. ’
　　‘I rish offending him if I don't go. Oh，I wish I could have continued as I've been for the last year or so，with no hopes or fears，and no pleasures and no sadness. ’
　　‘If Mr Boldwood asked you to run away with him，what would you say，ma'am？’said Liddy with a smile.
　　‘Now，Liddy，no joking. This is far too serious. I won't marry anyone for a long time. Get my cloak. It's time to go. ’
　　At the same time，in his farmhouse，Boldwood was also dressing He was trying on a new coat which had just been delivered. Tonight he wanted to look his best.
　　Just then Gabriel entered，to report on farm business.
　　‘Oh，Oak，’said Boldwood. ‘You're invited to the party tonight，of course. ’
　　‘I'll try to come，if I'm not too busy，’said Gabriel quietly. ‘I'm glad to see you looking happier，sir. ’
　　‘Yes，I confess I'm cheerful tonight. But my happiness depends on a hope. Oak，my hands are shaking. Could you help me with the buttons on this coat？’And as Gabriel came forward to help，he went on feverishly，‘Oak，does a woman keep her promise to become engaged？You know women better than I do—tell me. ’
　　‘I don't think I understand women well at all. But if she wants to put right a mistake，she may keep a promise like that. ’
　　‘I think she will，’whispered Boldwood. ‘She says she can think of me as a husband seven years after Troy's disappear-ance. ’
　　‘Seven years，’said Gabriel，shaking his head. ‘A long time. ’
　　‘But it isn't seven years！’answered Boldwood impatiently. ‘It's only five years，nine months and a few days now！’
　　‘Don't build your hopes on her promise，sir. Remember，she disappointed you once. And she's young. ’
　　‘She never promised me that first time，so she's never broken her promise to me yet. I trust her to keep her word. But let's talk business for a moment，Oak. You work so hard as my farm manager that I want you to have a larger share of the profits. I know a little about your secret. You have warm feelings for her too，but you've let me succeed in courting her！I want to show you how grateful I am for that. ’
　　‘Oh，that's not necessary，thank you，’said Gabriel hurriedly. ‘I must get used to my disappointment as other men have. ’He left，rather worried by Boldwood's strange manner.
　　Outside the front door of Boldwood's house a group of men were talking quietly.
　　‘Sergeant Troy was seen in Casterbridge this afternoon，’said Billy Smallbury. ‘His body was never found，you know，neighbours. ’
　　‘Should we tell the mistress？’asked Laban Tall. ‘Poor woman！What a mistake she made in marrying him！’
　　Just then Boldwood came out and walked to the gate. He did not notice the men，who were standing in the darkness.
　　‘I hope to God she'll come！’he whispered. ‘Oh，my darling，my darling，why do you make me wait like this！’
　　They all heard his words clearly. The sound of wheels came from the road，and Bathsheba arrived. Boldwood took her into the house，and the door closed behind them.
　　‘I didn't realize he was still in love with her！’said Billy.
　　‘Poor Mr Boldwood，the news will be hard for him，’said Jan Coggan. ‘We'll have to tell the mistress her husband's still alive. We'll go in and find the right moment to speak to her. ’
　　But the right moment never came. Bathsheba had planned to stay at the party for only an hour，and she was in fact preparing to leave when Boldwood found her alone in an upstairs room.
　　‘Mrs Troy，you can't go！’he said wildly. ‘We've only just begun！’
　　‘I'd like to go now. I think I'll walk home. ’
　　‘You know what I want to say to you？’Bathsheba looked silently at the floor. ’You do give it？’he said eagerly.
　　‘Give what？’she asked，althoug she knew well what he meant.
　　‘Your promise！Just a business arrangement between two sensible people who no longer think of love. To marry me in five to six years！You owe it to me！’
　　‘I have no feeling in that matter at all，’she replied，hesitating. ‘But if I must，I promise—if I'm really a widow. ’
　　‘You'll marry me in five and three-quarter years’time？’
　　‘Let me think！I'll marry nobody else. Oh，I don't know！Is Frank really dead？Perhaps I should ask a lawyer！’
　　‘Say the words，my dear one，and I won't speak about it any more. A long engagement，then marriage—Oh Bathsheba！Promise yourself to me！’he begged wildly，forgetting his cool，businesslike manner. ‘I've loved you so much and for so long！’
　　‘Very well，’she said after a pause，‘I'll marry you six years from now if we're both alive and if my husband doesn't return. ’
　　‘Then wear this ring for me. ’Boldwood took from his pocket a diamond engagement ring，and held it out to her.
　　‘No，no，I can't，I don't want anyone to know！’
　　‘Just wear it tonight，to please me！’Bathsheba could say no more，and weakly let him put it on her finger. He left her.
　　In a few minutes she was calmer. She put on her cloak and went downstairs. She paused at the foot of the stairs. Bold-wood was standing near the fire，and he had just noticed that a group of villagers were whispering among themselves.
　　‘What's the matter，men？’he asked cheerfully. ‘Is any-body engaged or married，born or dead？Tell us the news，Tall. ’
　　‘I wish somebody was dead，’replied Laban Tall in a whisper.
　　‘What was that，Tall？’asked Boldwood. ‘Speak out，if you have anything to say. ’
　　At that moment there was a knock on the front door. One of the men opened it. ‘A stranger wants to see Mrs Troy，’he said.
　　‘Ask him to come in，’said Boldwood.
　　The message was given，and Troy，wrapped up to his eyes in the cloak，stood in the doorway. Those who knew he was in the area recognized him immediately. Boldwood did not. He said，‘Come in，stranger，and have a Christmas drink with us！’
　　Troy entered，threw off his cloak and looked Boldwood in the face. But it was only when he laughed that Boldwood recognized the man who had destroyed his hope and happiness once and was about to do it again.
　　Troy turned to Bathsheba. She had dropped miserably on to the lowest stair. Her mouth was blue and dry，her eyes empty and staring. He said，‘Bathsheba，I've come here for you！’She did not reply. ‘Come home with me，do you hear！’He went towards her.
　　A strange，thin voice，full of despair，came from the fire-place. ‘Bathsheba，go with your husband！’said Boldwood.
　　She did not move，and when Troy stretched out his hand to pull her towards him，she fell back with a quick，low scream.
　　A second later there was a loud bang，and the hall was filled with smoke. At Bathsheba's cry，Boldwood's despair had turned to anger. From the wall above the fireplace he had taken a gun and shot Troy，who now lay very still. Boldwood turned the gun on himself，but was stopped by one of his men.
　　‘It doesn't matter！’Boldwood gasped. ‘There's another way to die！’
　　He crossed the room to Bathsheba，and kissed her hand. Then he went out into the darkness before anyone could prevent him.






■ 19 Bathsheba and Gabriel
　　Gabriel arrived at Boldwood's house about five minutes after the shooting. The villagers were all shocked and silent，but Bathsheba was sitting on the floor，calmly holding Troy's head.
　　‘Gabriel，’she said simply，‘I'm afraid it's too late，but ride to Casterbridge for a doctor. Mr Boldwood has shot my husband Gabriel obeyed at once，and while riding along was tinking so hard about the shooting that in the darkness he failed to notice a man walking along the road to Casterbridge. That man was Boldwood，on his way to Casterbridge to confess to his crime.
　　Bathsheba ordered the body to be removed to her house，and by herself she washed and dressed her dead husband for burial. But when the doctor，the vicar and Gabriel arrived，and she no longer needed to be strong，her self-control finally broke，and she became very ill. On the doctor's advice she was put to bed，and her illness continued for several months.
　　At his trial the following March Boldwood was found guilty of murder，for which the usual punishment was death. However，Weatherbury people began to protest publicly that he should not be held responsible for the crime. Over the last few weeks the villagers had noticed how his moods changed from wild despair to feverish excitement. He had forgotten his farm and even lost the previous year's harvest. And a pile of carefully wrapped parcels of dresses and jewels was found at his house，addressed to‘Bathsheba Boldwood’and dated six years ahead. These were accepted by the judges as signs of his mad-ness，and in the end Boldwood was sent to prison for life. Gabriel knew that Bathsheba blamed herself for Troy's death，and would have blamed herself even more for Boldwood's.
　　Her health improved only very slowly. She hardly ever went out of the house or garden，and did not discuss her feelings with anyone，even Liddy. But by the summer she was begin-ning to spend more time in the open air，and one August evening she walked to the churchyard. She could hear the village children inside the church practising their singing for Sunday. She went straight to Fanny's grave，and read Troy's words on the large gravestone：
　　This stone was put up by Francis Troy in loving memory of Fanny Robin，who died on October 9，1866，aged 20Underneath，on the same stone，were the words she had added：
　　In the same grave lies Francis Troy who died on December 24，1867，aged 26
　　As she listened to the sweet voices of the children coming from the church，and thought of the pain she had experienced in her short life，tears came to her eyes. She wished she were as innocent as those children again. She was still crying when she suddenly noticed Gabriel Oak，who had come up the path on his way to the church，and was watching her sympathetically.
　　‘Are you going in？’she asked，trying to dry her tears.
　　‘I was，’he replied. ‘I'm one of the church singers，you know，and tonight's my practice evening. But I don't think I'll go in now. ’There was a pause，while they both tried to think of something to say. At last Gabriel said slowly，‘I haven't seen you，to speak to，for a long time. Are you better now？’
　　‘Yes，I am，’she replied. ‘I came to look at the gravestone. ’
　　‘Eight months ago it happened！’said Gabriel. ‘It seems like yesterday to me. ’
　　‘And to me it seems like years，long years ago. ’
　　‘There's something I must tell you，’said Gabriel，hesitating. ‘The fact is，I won't be your farm manager much longer. I'm thinking of leaving England，and farming in America. ’
　　‘Leaving England！’she cried in surprise and disappoint-ment. ‘But everyone thought you would rent poor Mr Bold-wood's farm and manage it yourself！’
　　‘The lawyers have offered it to me，it's true. But I'll be leaving Weatherbury next spring. I have my reasons. ’
　　‘And what shall I do without you？Oh Gabriel，we're such old friends！You've helped me so much in the past，and now that I'm more helpless than ever，you're going away！’
　　‘It's unfortunate，’said Gabriel unhappily. ‘It's because of that helplessness that I have to go，’and he walked so guickly out of the churchyard that she could not follow him.
　　In the next few months Bathsheba noticed miserably that Gabriel communicated with her as little as possible，and then only by messenger. She could not avoid thinking that he，the last friend she had，had lost interest in supporting her，and was about to desert her. On the day after Christmas she received the letter from him which she had been expecting. In it he explained that he would leave the farm in three months’time.
　　Bathsheba sat and cried bitterly over this letter. She was deeply hurt that Gabriel no longer loved her. She was also worried about having to manage the farm by herself again. She thought about it all morning，and was so depressed by the afternoon that she put on her cloak and found her way to where Gabriel lived. She knocked at the door.
　　‘Who is it？’said Gabriel，opening the door. ‘Oh，It's you，mistress！’
　　‘I won't be your mistress much longer，will I，Gabriel？’she said sadly.
　　‘Well，no，I suppose not. ’
　　Because these two people，who knew each other well，were meeting in a strange place，they felt like the strangers they were when they first met，and neither spoke for a moment.
　　‘Gabriel，perhaps I shouldn't have come，but I—I thought I must have offended you，and that's why you're going away.
　　‘Offended me！You couldn't do that，Bathsheba！’
　　‘Couldn't I？’she said gladly. ‘But then why are you going？’
　　‘I'm not going to America，you know. I decided not to，when you seemed against the idea. No，I've arranged to rent Mr Boldwood's farm，and I could have been your farm manager as well，if—well—if people hadn't said things about us. ’
　　‘What？’said Bathsheba，surprised. ‘What things？’
　　‘Well，if you must know，that I'm just waiting and hoping for the chance to marry you some day. ’
　　‘Marry me！That's too foolish—too soon—to think of！’
　　‘Yes，of course，it's foolish. I certainly agree. ’
　　‘“Too soon”were the words I used. ’
　　‘I'm sorry，but I think you said“too foolish”. ’
　　‘I'm sorry too，’she replied with tears in her eyes. ‘“Too soon”was what I said. But it doesn't matter a bit，not at all—but I only meant“too soon”. Indeed，you must believe me！’
　　Gabriel looked into her face for a long time. ‘Bathsheba，’he said，coming closer，‘If I only knew one thing—whether you'd allow me to love you，and marry you after all—if I only knew！’
　　‘But you never will know，’she whispered.
　　‘Why not？’
　　‘Because you never ask. ’
　　‘Oh！’said Gabriel delightedly. ‘My darling—’
　　‘You should never have sent me that cruel letter this morning. It shows you don't care a bit about me！’
　　‘Now Bathsheba，’he said，laughing，‘you know very well that I had to be very careful，as a single man working for you，a good-looking young woman. I've been so worried about your good name. That's why I was going to leave. ’
　　‘And that's the only reason？Oh，I'm so glad I came！’she cried thankfully，as she got up to leave. ‘I've thought so much more about you since I imagined you didn't even want to see me again. But Gabriel，I shouldn't have come to visit you！I seem to be courting you！How awful！’
　　‘Well，I've courted you，my beautiful Bathsheba，for a very long time，so one visit from you isn't much to ask. ’
　　As he walked back to the farmhouse with her，they talked of his plans for Boldwood's farm. They spoke very little of their feelings for each other. They were such old friends that expressions of love were probably unnecessary. Their shared interests and their long，friendly relationship had given them a complete understanding of each other's character，and this finally developed，after their wedding，into a love that nothing could destroy.




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Jane Eyre by Charlotte Bronte





　　People in This Story
　　Jane Eyre
　　At Gateshead
　　Mrs Reed，Jane Eyre's aunt
　　Bessie，the nursemaid
　　Miss Abbott，Mrs Reed's maid
　　Dr Lloyd
　　Robert，the coachman．
　　At Lowood School
　　Mr Brocklehurst，the school's financial manager
　　Miss Temple，the headmistress
　　Helen Burns，a pupil
　　At Thornfield
　　Mrs Fairfax，the housekeeper
　　Adéle，daughter of Mr Rochester's French mistress
　　Edward Rochester，the owner of Thornfield Hall
　　Lady Ingram，their mother
　　Grace Poole
　　Dick Mason
　　Mr Briggs，lawyer to Mr Eyre of Madeira
　　Bertha Mason
　　At Moor House
　　St John Rivers，brother of Diana and Mary，and vicar of
　　Morton
　　Hannah，his housekeeper
　　Rosamund Oliver，daughter of a rich factory-owner
　　At Ferndean Manor



■ Part One - A Child at Gateshead



■ 1 The red room
　　We could not go for a walk that afternoon．There was such a freezing cold wind，and such heavy rain，that we all stayed indoors．I was glad of it．I never liked long walks，especially in winter．I used to hate coming home when it was almost dark，with ice-cold fingers and toes，feeling miserable bccause Bessie，the nursemaid，was always scolding me．All the time I knew I was different from my cousins，Eliza，John and Georgiana Reed．They were taller and stronger than me，and they were loved．
　　These three usually spent their time crying and quarrelling，but today they were sitting quietly around their mother in the sitting-room．I wanted to join the family circle，but Mrs Reed，my aunt，refused Bessie had complainted about me．
　　'No，I'm sorry，Jane．Until I hear from Bessie，or see for myself，that you are really trying to behave better，you cannot be treated as a good，happy child，like my children．'
　　'What does Bessie say I have done？'I asked．
　　'Jane，it is not polite to question me in that way．If you cannot speak pleasantly，be quiet．'
　　I crept out of the sitting-room and into the small room next door，where I chose a book full of pictures from the bookcase． I climbed on to the window-seat and drew the curtains，so that I was completely hidden．I sat there for a while．Sometimes I looked out of the window at the grey November afternoon，and saw the rain pouring down on the leafless garden．But most of the time I studied the book and stared，fascinated，at the pictures．Lost in the world of imagination，I forgot my sad，lonely existence for a while，and was happy，I was only afraid that my secret hiding-place might be discovered．
　　Suddenly the door of the room opened．John Reed rushed in．
　　'Where are you，rat？'he shouted．He did not see me behind the curtain．'Eliza！Georgy！Jane isn't here！Tell Mamma she's run out into the rain—what a bad animal she is！'
　　'How lucky I drew the curtain，'I thought．He would never have found me，because he was not very intelligent．But Eliza guessed at once where I was．
　　'She's in the window-seat，John，'she called from the sitting-room．So I came out immediately，as I did not want him to pull me out．
　　'What do you want？'I asked him．
　　'Say，“What do you want，Master Reed”，'he answered，sitting in an armchair．'I want you to come here．'
　　John Reed was fourteen and I was only ten．He was large and rather fat．He usually ate too much at meals，which made him ill．He should have been at boarding school，but his mother，who loved him very much，had brought him home for a month or two，because she thought his health was delicate．
　　John did not love his mother or his sister，and he hated me He bullied and punished me，not two or three times a week，not once or twice a day，but all the time．My whole body trembled when he came near．Sometimes he hit me，sometimes he just threatened me，and I lived in terrible fear of him．I had no idea about how to stop him．The servants did not want to offend their young master，and Mrs Reed could see no fault in her dear boy．
　　So I obeyed John's order and approached his armchair，thinking how very ugly his face was．Perhaps he understood what I was thinking，for he hit me hard on the face．
　　'That is for your rudeness to Mamma just now，'he said，'and for your wickedness in hiding，and for looking at me like that，you rat！'I was so used to his bullying that I never thought of hitting him back．
　　'What were you doing behind that curtain？'he asked．
　　'I was reading，'I answered．
　　'Show me the book．'I gave it to him．
　　'You have no right to take our books，'he continued．'You have no money and your father left yor none．You ought to beg in the streets，not live here in comfort with a gentleman's family．Aayway，all these books are mine，and so is the whole house，or will be in a few years'time．I'll teach you not to borrow my books again．'He lifted the heavy book and threw it hard at me．
　　It hit me and I fell，cutting my head on the door．I was in great pain，and suddenly for the first time in my life，I forgot my fear of John Reed．
　　'You wicked，cruel boy！'I cried．'You are a bully！You are as bad as a murderer！'
　　'What！What！'he cried．'Did she say that to me？Did you hear，Eliza and Georgiana？I'll tell Mamma，but first…'
　　He rushed to attack me，but now he was fighting with a desperate girl．I really saw him as a wicked murderer．I felt the blood running down my face，and the pain gave me strength．I fought back as hard as I could．My resistance surprised him，and he shouted for help．His sisters ran for Mrs Reed，who called her maid，Miss Abbott，and Bessie．They pulled us apart and I heard them say，'What a wicked girl！She attacked Master John！'
　　Mrs Reed said calmly，'Take her away to the red room and lock her in there．'And so I was carried upstairs，arms waving and legs kicking．
　　As soon as we arrived in the red room，I became quiet again，and the two servants both started scolding me．
　　'Really，Miss Eyre，'said Miss Abbott，'how could you hit him？He's your young master！'
　　'How can he be my master？I am not a servant！'I cried．
　　'No，Miss Eyre，you are less than a servant，because you do not work，replied Miss Abbott．They both looked at me as if they strongly disapproved of me．
　　'You should remember，miss，'said Bessie，'that your aunt pays for your food and clothes，and you should be grateful．You have no other relations or friends．'
　　All my short life I had been told this，and I had no answer to it．I stayed silent，listening to these painful reminders．
　　'And if you are angry and rude，Mrs Reed may send you away，'added Bessie．
　　'Anyway，'said Miss Abbott，'God will punish you，Jane Eyre，for your wicked heart．Pray to God，and say you're sorry．'They left the room，locking the door carefully behind them．
　　The red room was a cold，silent room，hardly ever used，although it was one of the largest bedrooms in the house．Nine years ago，my uncle，Mr Reed，had died in this room，and since then nobody had wanted to sleep in it．
　　Now that I was alone I thought bitterly of the people I lived with．John Reed，his sisters，his mother，the servants，they all accused me，scolded me，hated me．Why could I never please them？Eliza was selfish，but was respected．Georgiana had a bad temper，but she was popular with everybody because she was beautiful John was rude，cruel and violent，but nobody punished him．I tried to make no mistakes，but they called me，naughty every moment of the day．Now that I had turned against John to protect myself，everybody blamed me．
　　And so I spent that whole long afternoon in the red room asking myself why I had to suffer and why life was so unfair．Perhaps I would run away，or starve myself to death．
　　Gradually it became dark outside．The rain was still beating on the windows，and I could hear the wind in the trees．Now I was no longer angry，and I began to think the Reeds might be right．Perhaps I was wicked．Did I deserve to die，and be buried in the churchyard like my uncle Reed？I could not remember him，but knew he was my mother's brother，who had taken me to his house when my parents both died．On his death bed he had made his wife，aunt Reed，promise to look after me like her own children．I supposed she now regretted her promise．
　　A strange idea came to me．I felt sure that if Mr Reed had lived he would have treated me kindly，and now，as I looked round at the dark furniture and the walls in shadow，I began to fear that his ghost might come back to punish his wife for not keeping her promise．He might rise from the grave in the churchyard and appear in this room！I was so frightened by this thought that I hardly dared to breathe．Suddenly in the darkness I saw a light moving on the ceiling．It may have been from a lamp outside，but in my nervous state I did not think of that．I felt sure it must be a ghost，a visitor from another world．My head was hot，my heart beat fast．Was that the sound of wings in my ears？Was that something moving near me？Screaming wildly，I rushed to the door and shook it．Miss Abbott and Bessie came running to open it．
　　'Miss Eyre，are you ill？'asked Bessie．
　　'Take me out of here！'I screamed．
　　'Why？What's the matter？'she asked．
　　'I saw a light，and I thought it was a ghost，'I cried，holding tightly on to Bessie's hand．
　　'She's not even hurt，'said Miss Abbott in disgust．'She screamed just to bring us here．I know all her little tricks．'
　　'What is all this？'demanded an angry voice．Mrs Reed appeared at the door of the room．'Abbott and Bessie，I think I told you to leave Jane Eyre in this room till I came．'
　　'She screamed so loudly，ma'am，'said Bessie softly．
　　'Let go off her hands，Bessie，'was Mrs Reed's only answer．'Jane Eyre，you need not think you can succeed in getting out of the room like this．Your naughty tricks will not work with me．You will stay here an hour longer as a punishment for trying to deceive us．'
　　'Oh aunt，please forgive me！I can't bear it！I shall die if you keep me here…'I screamed and kicked as she held me．
　　'Silence！Control yourself！'She pushed me，resisting wildly，back into the red room and locked me in．There I was in the darkness again，with the silence and the ghosts．I must have fainted．I cannot remember anything more．









■ 2 Leaving Gateshead
　　I woke up to find the doctor lifting me very carefully into my own bed．It was good to be back in my familiar bedroom，with a warm fire and candle-light．It was also a great relief to recognize Dr Lloyd，who Mrs Reed called in for her servants（she always called a specialist for herself and the children）．He was looking after me so kindly．I felt he would protect me from Mrs Reed．He talked to me a little，then gave Bessie orders to take good care of me．When he left，I felt very lonely again．
　　But I was surprised to find that Bessie did not scold me at all．In fact she was so kind to me that I became brave enough to ask a question．
　　'Bessie，what's happened？Am I ill？'
　　'Yes，you became ill in the red room，but you'll get better，don't worry，Miss Jane，'she answered．Then she went next door to fetch another servant．I could hear her whispers．
　　'Sarah，come in here and sleep with me and that poor child tonight．I daren't stay alone with her，she might die．She was so ill last night！Do you think she saw a ghost？Mrs Reed was too hard on her，I think．'So the two servants slept in my room，while I lay awake all night，trembling with fear，and eyes wide open in horror，imagining ghosts in every corner．
　　Fortunately I suffered no serious illness as a result of my terrible experience in the red room，although I shall never forget that night．But the shock left me nervous and depressed for the next few days．I cried all day long and although Bessie tried hard to tempt me with nice things to eat or my favourite books，I took no pleasure in eating or even in reading．I knew I had no one to love me and nothing to look forward to．
　　When the doctor came again，he seemed a little surprised to find me looking so miserable．
　　'Perhaps she's crying because she couldn't go out with Mrs Reed in the carriage this morning，'suggested Bessie．
　　'Surely she's more sensible than that，'said the doctor，smiling at me．'She's a big girl now．'
　　'I'm not crying about that．I hate going out in the carriage．'I said quickly．'I'm crying because I'm miserable．'
　　'Oh really，Miss！'said Bessie．
　　The doctor looked at me thoughtfully．He had small，grey，intelligent eyes．Just then a bell rang for the servants'dinner．
　　'You can go，Bessie，'he said．'I'll stay here talking to Miss Jane till you come back．'
　　After Bessie had left，he asked，'What really made you ill？'
　　'I was locked up in a room with a ghost，in the dark．'
　　'Afraid of ghosts，are you？'he smiled．
　　'Of Mr Reed's ghost，yes．He died in that room，you know．Nobody ever goes in there any more．It was cruel to lock me in there alone without a candle．I shall never forget it！'
　　'But you aren't afraid now．There must be another reason why you are so sad，'he said，looking kindly at me．
　　How could I tell him all the reasons for my unhappiness！
　　'I have no father or mother，brothers or sisters，'I began．
　　'But you have a kind aunt and cousins．'
　　'But John Reed knocked me down and my aunt locked me in the red room，'I cried．There was a pause．
　　'Don't you like living at Gateshead，in such a beautiful house？'he asked．
　　'I would be glad to leave it，but I have nowhere else to go．'
　　'You have no relations apart from Mrs Reed？'
　　'I think I may have some，who are very poor，but I know nothing about them，'I answered．
　　'Would you like to go to school？'he asked finally．I thought for a moment．I knew very little about school，but at least it would be a change，the start of a new life．
　　'Yes，I would like to go，'I replied in the end．
　　'Well，well，'said the doctor to himself as he got up，'we'll see．The child is delicate，she ought to have a change of air．'
　　I heard later from the servants that he had spoken to Mrs Reed about me，and that she had agreed immediately to send me to school．Abbott said Mrs Reed would be glad to get rid of me．In this conversation I also learned for the first time that my father had been a poor vicar．When he married my mother，Miss Jane Reed of Gateshead，the Reed family were so angry that they disinherited her．I also heard that my parents both died of an illness only a year after their wedding．
　　But days and weeks passed，and Mrs Reed still said nothing about sending me to school．One day，as she was scolding me，I suddenly threw a question at her．The words just came out without my planning to say them．
　　'What would uncle Reed say to you if he were alive？'I asked．
　　'What？'cried Mrs Reed，her cold grey eyes full of fear，staring at me as if I were a ghost．I had to continue．
　　'My uncle Reed is now in heaven，and can see all you think and do，and so can my parents．They know how you hate me，and are cruel to me．'
　　Mrs Reed smacked my face and left me without a word．I was scolded for an hour by Bessie as the most ungrateful child in the world，and indeed with so much hate in my heart I did feel wicked．
　　Christmas passed by，with no presents or new clothes for me．Every evening I watched Eliza and Georgiana putting on their new dresses and going out to parties Sometimes Bessie would come up to me in my lonely bedroom，bringing a piece of cake，sometimes she would tell me a story，and sometimes she would kiss me goodnight．When she was kind to me I thought she was the best person in the world，but she did not always have time for me．
　　On the morning of the fifteenth of January，Bessie rushed up to my room，to tell me a visitor wanted to see me．Who could it be？I knew Mrs Reed would be there too and I was frightened of seeing her again．When I nervously entered the breakfast-room I looked up at a black column！At least that was what he looked like to me．He was a tall，thin man dressed all in black，with a cold，stony face at the top of the column．
　　'This is the little girl I wrote to you about，'said Mrs Reed to the stony stranger．
　　'Well，Jane Eyre，'said the stranger heavily，'and are you a good child？'
　　It was impossible to say yes，with Mrs Reed sitting there，so I was silent．
　　'Perhaps the less said about that，the better，Mr Brocklehurst，'said Mrs Reed，shaking her head．
　　'I'm sorry to hear it，he answered．'Come here．Jane Eyre，and answer my questions．Where do the wicked go after death？'
　　'They go to hell，'I answered．
　　'And what must you do to avoid going there？'he asked．
　　I thought for a moment，but could not find the right answer．
　　'I must keep in good health，and not die，'I replied．
　　'Wrong！Children younger than you die all the time．Another question．Do you enjoy reading the Bible？'
　　'Yes，sometimes，'I replied，hesitating．
　　'That is not enough．Your answers show me you have a wicked heart．You must pray to God to change it，if you ever want to go to heaven．'
　　'Mr Brocklehurst，'interrupted Mrs Reed，'I mentioned to you in my letter that this little girl has in fact a very bad character．If you accept her at Lowood school，please make sure that the headmistress and teachers know how dishonest she is．She will try to lie to them of course．You see，Jane，you cannot try your tricks on Mr Brocklehurst．'
　　However hard I had tried to please Mrs Reed in the past，she always thought the worst of me．It was not surprising that I had come to hate her．Now she was accusing me in front of a stranger．My hopes of starting a new life at school began to fade．
　　'Do not worry，madam，'Mr Brocklehurst said，'the teachers will watch her carefully．Life at Lowood will do her good．We believe in hard work，plain food，simple clothes and no luxury of any kind．'
　　'I will send her as soon as possible then，Mr Brocklehurst．I hope she will be taught according to her low position in life．'
　　'Indeed she will，madam．I hope she will be grateful for this opportunity to improve her character．Little girl，read this book．It tells the story of the sudden death of a young girl who was a liar．Read and pray．'
　　After Mr Brocklehurst had given me the book and left，I felt I had to speak．Anger was boiling up inside me．I walked up to Mrs Reed and looked straight into her eyes．
　　'I do not deceive people！If I told lies，I would say I loved you！But I don't，I hate you！I will never call you aunt again as long as I live．If anyone asks how you treated me，I will tell them the truth，that you were very cruel to me．People think you are a good woman，but you are lying to them！'
　　Even before I had finished I began to experience a great feeling of freedom and relief．At last I had said what I felt！Mrs Reed looked frightened and unhappy．
　　'Jane，I want to be your friend．You don't know what you're saying．You are too excited．Go to your room and lie down．'
　　'I won't lie down．I'm quite calm．Send me to school soon，Mrs Reed．I hate living here．'
　　'I will indeed send her soon，'murmured Mrs Reed to herself．






■ Part Two - A Gril At Lowood



■ 3 My first impressions of school
　　Mrs Reed arranged for me to leave on the nineteenth of January．I had to get up very early to catch the coach，but Bessie helped me to get ready．
　　'Will you say goodbye to Mrs Reed，Jane？'she asked．
　　'No，she said I shouldn't disturb her so early．Anyway，I don't want to say anything to her．She's always hated me．'
　　'Oh，Miss Jane，don't say that！'
　　'Goodbye to Gateshead！'I shouted wildly，as we walked together out of the front door，to wait for the coach in the road．It arrived，pulled by four horses，and full of passengers．The coachman took my luggage and called me to hurry up．Bessie kissed me for the last time as I held tightly to her．
　　She shouted up to the coachman，'Make sure you take care of her！Fifty miles is a long way for a young child to go alone．'
　　'I will！'he answered．The door was closed，and the coach rolled off．What a strange feeling to be leaving Gateshead，my home for the whole of my childhood！Although I was sad to say goodbye to Bessie，I was both excited and nervous about the new place I would see，and the new people I would meet．
　　I do not remember much about the journey，except that it seemed far too long．We stopped for lunch，to change the horses．Then in the afternoon I realized we were driving through countryside．I slept for a short time but was woken when the coach stopped．The door opened and a servant called in，
　　'Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here？'
　　'Yes，'I answered，and was helped out of the coach with my luggage．Tired and confused after the journey，I followed the servant into a large building，where she left me in a sitting-room．In came a tall lady，with dark hair and eyes，and a large，pale forehead．I discovered that she was Miss Temple，the headmistress of Lowood school．She looked at me carefully．
　　'You are very young to be sent alone．You look tired．Are you？'she asked，putting her hand kindly on my shoulder．
　　'A little，ma'am，'I replied．
　　'How old are you，and what is your name？'
　　'I'm Jane Eyre，ma'am，and I'm ten years old．'
　　'Well，I hope you will be a good child at school，'she said，touching my cheek gently with her finger．
　　I was taken by a teacher，Miss Miller，through the silent corridors of the large school，to the long，wide schoolroom．There about eighty girls，aged from nine to twenty，sat doing their homework．I sat on a bench near the door，with my slate．
　　'Put away the lesson-books and fetch the supper-trays！'called Miss Miller．Four tall girls removed all the books，then went out and returned with trays which were handed round．Each child could have a drink of water out of the shared cup，and could take a small piece of biscuit．Then we all went quietly upstairs to the long，crowded bedroom，where two children shared every bed．I had to share Miss Miller's，but I was so tired that I fell asleep immediately．
　　In the morning the ringing of a bell woke me，although it was still dark．I got dressed quickly in the bitter cold of the room，and washed when I could．There was only one basin for six girls．When the bell rang again，we all went downstairs，two by two，and silently entered the cold，badly lit schoolroom for prayers．As the bell rang a third time to indicate the beginning of lessons，the girls moved into four groups around four tables，and the teachers came into the room to start the Bible class．I was put in the bottom class．How glad I was when it was time for breakfast！I had hardly eaten anything the day before．But the only food served to us was porridge，which was burnt．It was so disgusting that we could not eat it，so we left the dining-room with empty stomachs．After breakfast came the one happy moment of the day，when the pupils could play and talk freely．We all complained bitterly about the uneatable breakfast．Lessons started again at nine o'clock and finished at twelve，when Miss Temple stood up to speak to the whole school．
　　'Girls，this morning you had a breakfast which you couldn't eat．You must be hungry，so I have ordered a lunch of bread and cheese for you all．'The teachers looked at her in surprise．
　　'Don't worry，I take responsibility for it，'she told them．
　　We were delighted，and all rushed out into the garden to eat our lunch．Nobody had taken any notice of me so far，but I did not mind that．I stood alone outside，watching some of the stronger girls playing，trying to forget the bitter cold，and thinking about my life．Gateshead and the Reed family seemed a long way away．I was not yet used to school life．And what sort of future could I look forward to？
　　As I wondered，I saw a girl near me reading a book．I felt brave enough to speak to her，since I too liked reading．
　　'Is your book interesting？What is it about？'I asked．
　　'Well，I like it，'she said after a pause，looking at me．'Here，have a look at it．'I glanced quickly at it but found it too difficult to understand，so I gave it back．
　　'What sort of school is this？'I asked．
　　'It's called Lowood school．It's a charity school．We're all charity children，you see．I expect your parents are dead，aren't they？All the girls here have lost either one or both parents．'
　　'Don't we pay anything？Is the school free？'I asked．
　　'We pay，or our relations pay，￡ 15 a year for each of us．That isn't enough，so some kind ladies and gentlemen in London pay the rest．That's why it's called a charity school．'
　　'Who is Mr Brocklehurst？'was my next question．
　　'His mother built this part of the school．He's the manager，and looks after all financial matters．He lives in a large house near here．'
　　I did not see her again until during the afternoon lessons，when I noticed that she had been sent to stand alone in the middle of the schoolroom．I could not imagine what she had done to deserve such a punishment，but she did not look ashamed or unhappy．She was lost in thought，and did not seem to notice that everyone was looking at her．
　　'If that happened to me，'I thought，'I would be so embarrassed！'
　　After lessons we had a small cup of coffee and half a piece of brown bread，then half an hour's play，then homework．Finally，after the evening biscuit and drink of water，we said prayers and went to bed．That was my first day at Lowood．






■ 4 Making a friend
　　The next morning we got up in the dark as before，but the water was frozen，so we could not wash．It was freezing cold in all the rooms．This time the porridge was not burnt，but I still felt hungry，as the quantity was so small．
　　I stayed in the bottom class，but noticed the girl that I had been talking to was in another class．Her surname seemed to be Burns．Teachers called girls by their surnames in this school．Her class were studying history，and her teacher，Miss Scatcherd，appeared constantly annoyed by her．
　　'Burns，hold your head up，can't you！'
　　'Burns，don't stand like that！'
　　The history questions asked by Miss Scatcherd sounded very difficult，but Burns knew all the answers．I kept expecting the teacher to praise her，but instead she suddenly cried out，
　　'You dirty girl！You haven't washed your hands this morning！'
　　I was surprised that Burns did not explain that none of us could wash our faces or hands because the water had been frozen．Miss Scatcherd gave an order．Burns left the room and returned，carrying a stick．The teacher took it and hit Burns several times with it．The girl did not cry or change her expression．
　　'Wicked girl！'said Miss Scatcherd．'Nothing will change your dirty habits！'
　　Later that day，during the play-hour，I found Burns alone by the fireside，reading the same book as before，and I started talking to her．
　　'What is the rest of your name？'I asked．
　　'Helen，'she replied．
　　'Do you want to leave Lowood？'
　　'No，why should I？I was sent to school here，so I must learn as much as I can．'
　　'But Miss Scatcherd is so cruel to you！'I burst out．
　　'Cruel？Not at all．She is strict and she sees my faults．'
　　'If I were you，I'd hate her，'I cried．'If she hit me with a stick，I'd seize it and break it under her nose．'
　　'I don't think you would，'answered Helen quietly．'And if you did，Mr Brocklehurst would send you away from school，and your relations would be upset．Anyway，the Bible tells us to do good，even if other people hurt us．Sometimes you have to put up with some hard things in life．'
　　I could not understand her ideas but I had a feeling she might be right．I looked at her in wonder．
　　'You say you have faults，Helen．What are they？To me you seem very good．'
　　'You are wrong，'she answered．'I'm untidy and careless and I forget the rules．I read when I should be doing my homework．You see，Miss Scatcherd is right to scold me．'
　　'Is Miss Temple as strict as that？'I asked．
　　A soft smile passed over Helen's normally serious face．
　　'Miss Temple is full of goodness．She gently tells me of my mistakes，and praises me if I do well．But even with her help I don't concentrate properly in class，I just dream away the time，and then I can't answer the teacher's questions．'
　　'But today in history you knew all the answers！'I said．
　　'I just happened to be interested，that's all，'she replied．
　　'I expect you are always interested in Miss Temple's lessons，because you like her and she is good to you．I'm like that．I love those who love me，and I hate those who punish me unfairly．'
　　'You should read the Bible and do what Christ says—people who believe in God should love their enemies，'said Helen．
　　'Then I should love Mrs Reed and her son John，which is impossible，'I cried．
　　Helen asked me to explain what I meant，and listened carefully to the long story of what I had suffered at Gateshead．
　　'Well，'I asked impatiently at the end，'isn't Mrs Reed a bad woman？Don't you agree with me？'
　　'It's true she has been unkind to you，because she dislikes your faults，as Miss Scatcherd dislikes mine．But look how bitterly you remember every angry word！Wouldn't you be happier if you tried to forget her scolding？Life is too short to continue hating anyone for a long time．We all have faults，but the time will come soon when we die，when our wickedness will pass away with our bodies，leaving only the pure flame of the spirit．That's why I never think of revenge，I never consider life unfair．I live in calm，looking forward to the end．'
　　For a moment we both stayed silent．Then one of the big girls came up，calling，'Helen Burns！Go and put away your work and tidy your drawer immediately，or I'll tell Miss scatcherd！'
　　Helen sighed，and，getting up，silently obeyed．






■ 5 Mr Brocklehurst's visit and its results
　　It was difficult for me to get used to the school rules at Lowood，and to the hard physical conditions．In January，February and March there was deep snow，but we still had to spend an hour outside every day．We had no boots or gloves，and my hands and feet ached badly．We were growing children，and needed more food than was provided．Sometimes the big girls bullied us little ones and made us hand over our teatime bread or evening biscuit．
　　One afternoon，when I had been at Lowood for three weeks，a visitor arrived．All the teachers and pupils stood respectfully as he entered the schoolroom．I looked up．There，next to Miss Temple，stood the same black column which had frowned on me in the breakfast-room at Gateshead．I had been afraid he would come．I remembered only too well Mrs Reed's description of my character，and the promise he had given her to warn teachers at Lowood about my wickedness．Now they would consider me a bad child for ever．
　　At first Mr Brocklehurst spoke in a murmur to Miss Temple．I could just hear because I was in the front of the class．
　　'Tell the housekeeper she must count the needles，and only give out one at a time to the girls，they lose them so easily！And Miss Temple，please make sure the girls stockings are mended more carefully．Some of them have a lot of holes．'
　　'I shall follow your instructions，sir，'said Miss Temple．
　　'And another thing which surprises me，I find that a lunch of bread and cheese has been served to the girls recently．Why is this？There is nothing about it in the rules！Who is responsible？' 'I myself，sir，'answered Miss Temple．'The breakfast was so badly cooked that the girls couldn't possibly eat it，so they were hungry．'
　　'Madam，listen to me for a moment．You know that I am trying to bring up these girls to be strong，patient and unselfish．If some little luxury is not available，do not replace it with something else，but tell them to be brave and suffer，like Christ Himself．Remember what the Bible says，man shall not live by bread alone，but by the word of God！Madam，when you put bread into these children's mouths，you feed their bodies but you starve，their souls！'
　　Miss Temple did not reply．She looked straight in front of hef，and her face was as cold and hard as marble．Mr Brocklehurst，on the other hand，now looked round at the girls，and almost jumped in surprise
　　'Who—what is that girl with red hair，with curls，madam，with curls everywhere？'
　　'That is Julia Severn，'said Miss Temple quietly．'Her hair curls naturally，you see．'
　　'Naturally！Yes，but it is God we obey，not nature！Miss Temple，that girl's hair must be cut off．I have said again and again that hair must be arranged modestly and plainly．I see other girls here with too much hair．Yes，I shall send someone tomorrow to cut all the girls' hair．'
　　'Mr Brocklehurst…'began Miss Temple．
　　'No， Miss Temple，I insist． To please God these girls must have short， straight hair and plain， simple clothes…'
　　He was interrupted by the arrival of three ladies，who had unfortunately not heard his comments on dress and hair．They all wore the most expensive clothes and had beautiful，long，curly hair．I heard Miss Temple greet them as the wife and daughters of Mr Brocklehurst．
　　I had hoped to hide my face behind my slate while Mr Brocklehurst was talking，so that he would not recognize me，but suddenly the slate fell from my hand and broke in two on the hard floor．I knew only too well what would happen next．
　　'A careless girl！'said Mr Brocklehurst quietly，almost to himself'The new girl，I see． I must not forget to say something to the whole school about her．'and then to me，aloud，
　　'Come here，child．'
　　I was too frightened to move，but two big girls pushed me towards him． Miss Temple whispered kindly in my ear，'Don't be afraid，Jane．I saw it was an accident．'Her kindness touched me，but I knew that soon she would hear the lies about me，and then she would hate me！
　　'Put the child on that chair，said Mr Brocklehurst．Someone lifted me up on to a high chair，so that I was close to his nose．Frightened and shaking，I felt everyone's eyes on me．
　　'You see this girl？'began the black marble column．'She is young，she books like an ordinary child．Nothing about her tells you she is evil． But she is all wickedness！ Children， don't talk to her，stay away from her．Teachers， watch her， punish her body to save her soul—if indeed she has a soul，because this Child…I can hardly say it… this child is a liar！'
　　'How shocking！'said the two Brocklehurst daughters，each wiping a tear or two from their eyes．
　　'I learned this fact，'continued the great man，'from Mrs Reed，the kind lady who took care of her after her parents'death and brought her up as a member of the family． In the end Mrs Reed was so afraid of this child's evil influence on her own children that she had to send her here．Teachers， watch her carefully！'
　　The Brocklehurst farmily stood up and moved slowly out of the schoolroom．At the door， my judge turned and said，
　　'She must stand half an hour longer on that chair， and nobody may speak to her for the rest of the day．'
　　So there I was， high up on the chair， publicly displayed as an ugly example of evil．Feelings of shame and anger boiled up inside me，but just as I felt I could not bear it any longer，Helen Burns walked past me and lifted her eyes to mine． Her look calmed me．What a smile she had！It was an intelligent，brave smile，lighting up her thin face and her tired grey eyes．
　　When all the girls left the schoolroom at five o'clock， I climbed down from the chair and sat on the floor．I no longer felt strong or calm， and I began to cry bitterly．I had wanted so much to make friends at Lowood， to be good， to deserve praise． Now nobody would believe me or perhaps even speak to me．Could I ever start a new life after this？
　　'Never！'I cried．'I wish I were dead！'Just then Helen arrived，bringing my coffee and bread．I was too upset to eat or drink，but she sat with me for some time， talking gently to me， wiping away my tears， and helping me to recover． When Miss Temple came to look for me， she found us sitting quietly together．
　　'Gome up to my room，both of you，'she said．
　　We went to her warm，comfortable room upstairs．
　　'Now tell me the truth， Jane，'she said．'You have been accused， and you must have the chance to defend yourself．'
　　And so I told her the whole story of my lonely childhood with the Reed family，and of my terrible experience in the red room．
　　'I know Dr Lloyd，who saw you when you were ill，'she said．'I'll write to him and see if he agrees with what you say．If he does，I shall publicly tell the school you are not a liar．I believe you now，Jane．'And she kissed me．She turned to Helen．
　　'How are you tonight， Helen？ Have you coughed a lot today？'
　　'Not very much，ma'am．'
　　'And the pain in your chest？'
　　'It's a little better，I think．'
　　Miss Temple examined Helen carefully，and sighed a little Then she gave us some tea and toast．For a while I felt I was in heaven，eating and drinking in the warm，pretty room，with kind Miss Temple and Helen．
　　But when we reached our bedroom，Miss Scatcherd was checking the drawers．
　　'Burns！'she said．'Yours is far too untidy！Tomorrow，all day， you will wear a notice on your forehead saying UN－TIDY！'
　　Helen said Miss Scatcherd was quite right，and wore the notice all the next day But I was furious，and at the end of the afternoon，tore it off her head and threw it in the fire．
　　When Miss Temple received a letter from Dr Lloyd，agreeing that what I had said was true，she told the whole school that I had been wrongly accused and was not a liar From that moment，I felt I was accepted，and set to work to learn as much as I could，and make as many friends as possible．






■ 6 Learning to like school
　　Life at Lowood no longer seemed so hard，as spring approached．We enjoyed walking and playing in the surrounding countryside．But，with fog lying constantly in the valley，it was not a healthy place for a school，and by May more than half the girls were seriously ill with typhus fever．As a result of poor food and bad living conditions，many girls died．
　　While there was fear and death inside the school， the sun shone on the flowers outside，and on the flowing streams in the valleys．So I and the few who had escaped illness enjoyed the beautiful summer weather，with no lessons or discipline at all．
　　Helen Burns could not come walking with me，because she was ill，not with typhus but with tuberculosis．At first I had thought she would recover，but when I learned her illness was serious，I decided to visit her at night，for what might be the last time．I found her lying in bed，looking pale and weak．
　　'You've come to say goodbye，'she whispered，coughing．
　　'You are just in time．I'm going soon．'
　　'Where，Helen？Are you going home？'I asked．
　　'Yes，to my long home—my last home．'
　　'No，no，Helen！'I was crying at the thought of losing her．
　　'Jane，your feet are cold．Lie down with me and cover them with my blanket．'I did so．
　　'I am happy，Jane，'she continued．'You mustn't cry．By dying young，I'll avoid suffering．I am going to heaven．'
　　'Does heaven really exist？'I asked．
　　'Yes，I'm sure of it．I'm sure our souls go there when we die，'she answered firmly．'
　　'Will I see you again，Helen，when I die？'
　　'Yes，you will go to heaven too，Jane．'
　　I could not quite believe that heaven existed，and I held tightly to Helen．I did not want to let her go．We kissed goodnight and fell asleep．In the morning Miss Temple found me asleep with Helen Burns dead in my arms． She was buried in the local churchyard．
　　Gradually the typhus fever left Lowood，but the number of deaths made the public aware of the poor conditions in which the pupils lived．Money was raised to build a new school in a better position， many improvements were made，and Mr Brocklehurst lost his position as manager．So it became a really useful place of education．I stayed for eight years，for the last two as a teacher．I was busy and happy all that time，relying greatly on the help and encouragement of my dear friend Miss Temple．
　　But when she married and movd to a distant part of the country，I decided it was the moment for me to change my life too．I realized I had never known any other world apart from Lowood or Gateshead．Suddenly I wanted freedom…or at least a new master to serve．So I advertised in a newspaper for a job as a governess．When I received an answer from a Mrs Fairfax，who wanted a governess for a girl under ten years old，I accepted，with the permission of the new headmistress of Lowood．






■ Part Three - A Governess At Thomfield



■ 7 Thornfield and Mr Rochester
　　Thornfield Hall was a large gentleman's house in the country， near a town called Millcote．There，after my sixteen－hour journed，I was welcomed by Mrs Fairfax She was a little old lady，dressed in black，who seemed glad to have someone else to talk to，apart from the servants Although the house was dark and frightening，with its big rooms full of heavy furniture，I was excited at being in a new place，and looked forward to my new life there， working for kind Mrs Fairfax．
　　But I was surprised to discover on my first full day at Thornfield that Mrs Fairfax was not in fact the owner，as I had assumed，but the housekeeper，and that my new master was a Mr Rochester，who was often away from home． My pupil was a girl called Adeèe，seven or eight years old， who was born in France and could hardly speak English． Luckily I had learnt French very well at Lowtood，and had no difficulty in communicating with young Adèle，a pretty，cheerful child．It appeared that Mr Rochester，who had known Adèle and her mother very well，had brought Adèle back to England to live with him after her mother had died．I taught her for several hours every day in the library，although it was not easy to make her concentrate on anything for long，as she was clearly not used to the discipline of lessons．
　　One day I took the opportunity of asking Mrs Fairfax a few questions about Mr Rochester，as I was curious about him，and the little housekeeper seemed happy to talk．
　　'Is he liked by most people？'was my first question．
　　'Oh yes，his family have always been respected here．They've owned the land round here for years，'she replied．
　　'But do you like him？What is his character like？'
　　'I have always liked him， and I think he's a fair master to his servants．He's a little peculiar，perhaps．He's travelled a lot，you know．I expect he's clever，but I can't tell，really．'
　　'What do you mean，peculiar？'I asked，interested．
　　'It's not easy to describe． You're never sure whether he's serious or joking．You don't really understand him，at least I don't．But that doesn't matter，he's a very good master．'
　　I could get no further information from Mrs Fairfax about Mr Rochester，but instead she offered to show me round the whole house．We went through many large，impressive rooms，finally reaching the top floor，where there was a narrow corridor with several small black doors，all shut．I stopped to look at them， and thought for a moment they looked like prison doors，hiding evil secrets．No sooner had I turned away to go downstairs than I heard a strange，ghostly laugh．
　　'Mrs Fairfax！'I called out，as the housekeeper was already on her way downstairs．'Did you hear that laugh？ Who is it？'
　　'It may be Grace Poole，'she answered calmly．'She is paid to help the housemaid in her work，and always sews in one of those rooms．'I heard the laugh again．It did not sound human to me．
　　'Grace！'called Mrs Fairfax．I did not expect anyone to answer，but in fact a door opened and a middle－aged woman appeared．She looked too plain and sensible to be a ghost．
　　'Too much noise，Grace，'said Mrs Fairfax．'Remember your instructions！'Grace nodded and went back into the roon．
　　Several times in the next few months I went up to the top floor again，where I could look out of the high windows in the roof to see the surrounding countryside and be alone with my thoughts．I was very happy teaching pretty little Adèle in the daytime，and talking to kind old Mrs Fairfax in the evening，but I felt that something was missing from my life．I had dreams of a greater and better life，and above all，I wanted to do more．People are not always satisfied with a quiet life， and women as well as men need action．
　　While on the top floor I often heard Grace Poole's strange laugh，and sometimes I saw her too．She used to go silently in and out of the room with a plate of food or a glass of beer．
　　One day in January I had a free afternoon， as Adèle wsa ill，so I decided to walk to Hay，a village two miles away，to post a letter for the housekeeper．It was a bright，frosty day，and I was enjoying the fresh air and the exercise．Stopping on the lonely road，I watched the sun go down in the trees behind Thornfield，and then in the silence I heard a horse approaching．Suddenly there was a crash as the horse slipped and fell on the ice，bringing down its rider．I ran to see if I could help the traveller，who was swearing furiously as he pulled himself free of his horse．
　　'Are you hurt，sir？ Can I do anything？'I asked．
　　'Just stand back，'he growled，as he lifted himself painfully to his feet．Obviously his leg hurt him，and he sat down quickly．
　　'If you need help，sir，I can fetch someone either from Thornfield Hall or from Hay，' I offered．
　　'Thank you， but I don't need anyone．I haven't broken any bones，'he replied crossly．I could see him clearly in the moonlight．He was of medium height，with wide shoulders and a strong chest．He had a dark face，with angry－looking eyes，and was about thirty－five．If he had been a young，attractive gentleman，I would have been too shy to offer help，but as he was not handsome，and even quite rough，I felt I wanted to help him．
　　'I can't leave you，sir，so late on this lonely road，till I see you are fit enough to get on your horse，'I insisted．
　　He looked at me for the first time when I said this．
　　'I think you ought to be at home yourself，'he answered．
　　'Do you live near here？'
　　'In that house over therd，'I said，'and I'm not at all afraid of being out at night．I'm just going to Hay to post a letter，and I'll be happy to take a message for you．'
　　'You live in…in that house？'he asked，surprised，pointing to Thornfield Hall，which was lit up in the moonlight．
　　'Yes，sir，'I replied．
　　'Whose house is it？'he asked．
　　'Mr Rochester's．'
　　'Do you know Mr Rochester？'was his next question．
　　'No， I've never seen him，'I answered．
　　'You aren't a servant at Thornfield Hall，of course．You must be…'he hesitated，looking at my plain black dress．He seemed puzzled to know who I was， so I helped him．
　　'I am the governess．'
　　'Ah，the governess！I had forgptten！'He tried to get up but his leg was still hurting him badly．'I don't want you to fetch help，but you could help me yourself，if you like．'
　　'Of course，sir，'I said．And so he leaned his weight on my shoulder and I helped him wald to his horse．In a moment he had jumped on to the horse's back．
　　'Thank you，now take your letter to Hay，then hurry home！'he called as he rode off into the distance．
　　I walked on，glad to have helped someone，to have done something active for once．In my mind I saw that dark，strong face，and I still felt excited by our meeting．Even when I arrived back at Thornfield，I did not go in for a while．I did not want to go into the dark house，where I would spend the evening quietly with old Mrs Fairfax．So I stayed outside，staring up at the moon and the stars with a beating heart，wishing and dreaming of a different， more exciting life．
　　When I entered，the servants told me that Mr Rochester had arrived，and that he had hurt his leg when his horse slipped on ice on the road to Hay．









■ 8 Getting to know Mr Rochester
　　Thornfield Hall became quite busy the next day，now that the master had returned．People kept coming to visit him on business．I enjoyed the new，cheerful atmosphere．But I could not make Adele concentrate on her lessons because she was constantly talking about the presents Mr Rochester had promised to bring her．That evening we were invited to have tea with him． I immediately recognized the traveller I had helped，with his dark hair and skin，his square forehead and his stern look．His leg was supported on a chair，but he made no effort to greet me when I entered．In fact，he neither spoke nor moved．
　　'Have you brought a present for Miss Eyre with you as well？'Adele asked him．
　　'A present？Who wants a present？'he said angrily．'Did you expect a present，Miss Eyer？Do you like presents？'
　　'I haven't much experience of them，sir，'I answered．'Anyway，I have no right to expect a present，as I haven't done anything to deserve one．'
　　'Don't be so modest！I've been talking to Adele．She's not very clever，but you've taught her well．'
　　'Sir，that is my present．That's what a teacher wants most，praise of her pupil's progress．'
　　Mr Rochester drank his tea in silence After tea，he called me closer to the fire， while Adèle played with Mrs Fairfax．
　　'Where were you before you came here？'he asked．
　　'I was at Lowood school，sir，for eight years．'
　　'Ah，yes，a charity school！Eight years！I'm surprised you lasted so long in such a place．There is something like magic in your face．When I met you on the road to Hay last night，I almost thought you had put a spell on my horse！I still wonder if you did．What about your parents？'
　　'They're dead．I don't remember them．'
　　'And your relations？'
　　'I have none．'
　　'Who recommended you to come here？'
　　'I advertised，and Mrs Fairfax answered the advertise－ment．'
　　'Yes，'said the old housekeeper，'and I thank God she did．She's a good teacher for Adèle，and a kind friend to me．'
　　'Don't try to give her a good character，Mrs Fairfax，'said Mr Rochester sternly．'She and her magic made my horse slip on the ice last night．'
　　Mrs Fairfax looked puzzled and clearly did not understand．
　　'Miss Eyre，'continued Mr Rochester，'how old were you when you started at Lowood？'
　　'About ten．'
　　'And you stayed there eight years，so you are now eighteen？'I nodded．'I would never have been able to guess your age，'he went on．'Now，what did you learn there？Can you play the piano？'
　　'A little．'
　　'of course，that's what all young women say．Go and play a tune on the piano in the library．'I did as he asked．
　　'That's enough！'he called after a few minutes．'Yes，you do indeed play a ittle，just like any schoolgirl， better than some perhaps．Now，bring me your sketches．'I fetched them from my room Having looked carefully at them， he chose three．
　　'These are interesting，'he said．'You have only expressed the shadow of your ideas，because you aren't good enough at drawing or painting，but the ideas，where did they come from？Who taught you to draw wind，and space，and feeling？But put them away now，Miss Eyre．Do you realize it's nine o'clock？ Adèle should be in bed by now． Good night to you all．'Mr Rochester's mood had suddenly changed，and he clearly wished to be alone．
　　Later tha evening I talked to Mrs Fairfax． 'You said Mr Rochester was a little peculiar，'I said． 'Well， what do you think，Miss Eyre？' 'I think he is very peculiar，and quite rude．' 'He may seem like that to a stranger．I'm so used to him that I never notice it．And he has had family troubles，you know．'
　　'But he has no family，'I answered．
　　'Not now，that's true，but he did have an older brother，who died nine years ago．'
　　'Nine years is a long time．Surely he has recovered from losing his brother by now．'
　　'Well，there was a lot of bad feeling in the family．The father was very fond of money，and wanted to keep the family property together，so the elder brother inherited most of it．I don't know what happened，but I do know Mr Edward（that's the master）quarrelled with his family．That's why he's travelled so much．When his brother died，he inherited Thornfield，but I'm not surprised he doesn't come here often．'
　　'Why should he stay away？'I asked，surprised．
　　'Perhaps he thinks it's a sad place．I really don't know．'It was clear that Mrs Fairfax would not tell me any more．
　　One evening，a few days later，I was invited to talk to Mr Rochester after dinner．At the far end of the room Adèle was delightedly telling Mrs Fairfax about the presents she had received． Mr Rochester called me closer to the fire．
　　'I don't like the conversation of children or old ladies，'he murmured to me．'But they are entertaining each other at the moment，so I can amuse myself．'Tonight he did not look so stern，and there was a softness in his fine，dark eyes．As I was looking at him，he suddenly turned and caught my look．
　　'Do you think I'm handsome，Miss Eyre？'he asked．
　　Normally I would have taken time to think，and said something polite，but somehow I answered at once，'No，sir．'
　　'Ah，you really are unusual！You are a quiet，serious little person，but you can be almost rude．'
　　'Sir，I'm sorry．I should have said that beauty doesn't matter，or something like that．'
　　'No，you shouldn't！I see，you criticize my appearance，and then you stab me in the back！ All right，tell me． What is wrong with my appearance？'
　　'Mr Rochester，I didn't intend to criticize you．'
　　'Well，now you can Look at my head．Do you think I am intelligent？'He pointed to his huge，square forehead．
　　'I do，sir．Is it rude to ask if you are also good？'
　　'Stabbing me again！Just because I said I didn't like talking to old ladies and children！Well，young lady，I wanted to be good when I was younger，but life has been a struggle for me，and I've become as hard and tough as a rubber ball． I only have a little goodness left inside．'He was speaking rather excitedly，and I thought perhaps he had been drinking．'Miss Eyre，you look puzzled．Tonight I want conversation．It's your turn．Speak．'
　　I said nothing，but smiled coldly．
　　'I'm sorry if I'm rude，Miss Eyre．But I'm twenty years older，and more experienced，than you．Don't you think I have the right to command you？'
　　'No，sir，not just because you're older and more experienced than me．You would have the right only if you'd made good use of your experience of life．'
　　'I don't accept that，as I've made very bad use of my experience！But will you agree to obey my orders anyway？'
　　I thought，'He is peculiar，he's forgotten that he's paying me ￡ 30 a year to obey his orders，'and I said，'Not many masters bother to ask if their servants are offended by their orders．'
　　'Of course！I'd forgotten that I pay you a salary！So will you agree because of the salary？'
　　'No， sir，not because of that，but because you forgot about it，and because you care whether a servant of yours is comfortable or not，I gladly agree．'
　　'You have honesty and feeling．There are not many girls like you．But perhaps I go too fast．Perhaps you have awful faults to counterbalance your few good points．'
　　'And perhaps you have too，'I thought．
　　He seemed to read my mind，and said quickly，'Yes，you're right．I have plenty of faults．I went the wrong way when I was twenty－one，and have never found the right path again．I might have been very different．I might have been as good as you，and perhaps wiser．I am not a bad man，take my word for it，but I have done wrong．It wasn't my character，but circumstances which were to blame．Why do I tell you all this？Because you're the sort of person people tell their problems and secrets to，because you're sympathetic and give them hope．'
　　'Do you think so，sir？'
　　'I do．You see，when life was difficult，I became desperate，and now all I have is regret．'
　　'Asking forgiveness might cure it，sir．'
　　'No，it won't．What I really should do is change my character，and I still could but—it's difficult．And if I can't have happiness，I want pleasure，even if it's wrong．'
　　'Pleasure may taste bitter，sir．'
　　'How do you know，a pure young thing like you？You have no experience of life and its problems．But I will try to lead a better life．'
　　I stood up．The conversation was becoming hard to follow．
　　'I must put Adèle to bed now，'I said．
　　'Don't be afraid of me，Miss Eyre．You don't relax or laugh very much，perhaps because of the effect Lowood school has had on you．But in time you will be more natural with me，and laugh，and speak freely．You're like a restless bird in a cage．When you get out of the cage，you'll fly very high．Good night．'






■ 9 Mr Rochester's past
　　Soon I discovered what Mr Rochester meant when he said he had done wrong．One afternoon，while walking in the gardens of Thornfield，he told me the story of his love－affair in Paris with a French dancer，Geline．
　　'Yes，Miss Eyre，I was young and foolish then．I was so in love with her that I rented a house and hired servants for her．I gave her a carriage and jewels，in fact I threw away a fortune on her，just like any fool in love．One evening I visited her but found she was out，so I waited on her balcony，smoking a cigar．I heard her carriage arriving．Imagine my horror at seeing her step out followed by a man！You're so young，you've never felt love or jealousy，have you，Miss Eyre？You are floating along a quiet river now，you don't see the water boiling at the foot of the great rocks，but one day you'll come to a point in life's stream where the wild force of the waves may destroy you， where the noisy rushing water may drown you！I am calm enough now，calm enough to like living here at Thornfield．I like it because it's old，and grey，and dark， and yet I hate—'He did not finish what he was saying，staring angrily up at the windows on the top floor of his house．It was a look of disgust，pain and shame．I could not understand what he meant，and wanted to hear more about Celine，so I encouraged him to finish the story．
　　'What happened when she entered the house， sir？'
　　'Oh，I'd forgotten Céline！By the way，it's strange my telling you all this，but I know my secret's safe with you， and I know，too，that it can't have an evil influence on you－your mind's too strong for that． Yes， I listened to her conversation with her lover，an elegant young fool，and I knew I was no longer in love with her．So I walked into the room，told her our relationship was over，and challenged her lover to fight me．Next day I shot him in the arm during our fight，thought that was the end of the whole thing， and left France．But a few months before，Céline had had a baby girl，Adèle，and she claimed that Adèle was my child． She may be，although I doubt it．So when，a few years later，Céline abandoned Adèle and ran away to Italy with a singer，I went to Paris and brought Adèle back to grow up in England．'
　　I felt proud that Mr Rochester had trusted me with the story of his past life．I thought a lot about his character，and although I was aware of his faults，I also saw his goodness and kindness to me．From now on，my happiest moments were spent with him．I could not have imagined a better companion．
　　One night I was woken by a slight noise．I felt sure someone was outside my bedroom door． As I hurried to lock it，I called，'Who's there？There was a strange，inhuman sound，then I heard a door shut upstairs on the top floor．'Was that Grace Poole？'I wondered，trembling．My curiosity made me open the door， and I found the corridor full of smoke．I saw it was coming from Mr Rochester's door，which was slightly open．I completely forgot my fears and rushed into his room．He lay fast asleep，surrounded by flames and smoke． Even his sheets were on fire．
　　'Wake up！Wake up！'I shouted desperately，throwing water over him to put out the flames．Not until the fire was almost out did he wake up，swearing to find himself so wet．
　　'Is there a flood？' he cried．
　　'No，sir，I answered，'but there's been a fire．'
　　'Jane Eyre，is it you and your magic？'he asked．'Have you put a spell on me again？Did you intend to drown me this time？'
　　'Please get up，sir．Someone has plotted to kill you！'And I explained what I had heard and how I had put out the fire．He looked very serious，and thought for a few seconds．
　　'Shall I fetch Mrs Fairfax，sir，or the servants？'I asked．
　　'No， why bother them？Just stay here for a moment．I'm going up to the top floor．Don't call anyone，I'll be back soon．
　　I waited，cold and tired，in his room for what seemed a very long time．Then I saw the light of his candle approaching through the darkness，and he appeared，looking pale and depressed．
　　'Did you see anything when you opened your bedroom door？'he asked，glancing sharply at me．
　　'No，sir，only a candle on the floor．'
　　'But you heard a strange laugh，did you say？'
　　'Yes，I've heard it before．Grace Poole laughs like that．”
　　'That's it．It must have been Grace Poole．You've guessed it．I shall consider what to do about it．But meanwhile I'm glad you're the only person who knows anything about all this Say nothing to anybody else，and now，go back to your own room．
　　'Good night，then，sir，'I said，moving towards the door．
　　'What！Are you leaving me already！'he said，seeming surprised，although he had just told me to go，'And so coldly？'
　　'You said I should go，sir．'
　　'But not without saying goodbye，not without a kind word or two．Why，you've saved my life．I hate being in debt to anyone，but with you it's different，Jane．I'm happy to owe you my life．'His voice was trembling as he took both my hands in his．'I knew，when I first saw you，that you would do me good．I saw it in you eyes when I met you．I was right to…like…your smile and the magic in your face．'There was energy in his voice and a strange light in his eyes．
　　'I'm glad I happened to be awake，'I said，'but I must go now．I'm cold．'I knew I could not control my feelings much longer，and I needed time to think But he still held on to my hands．Then I thought of a way of escaping．
　　'I think I hear the servants moving，sir，'I said．
　　'Well， leave me，'he said， and let me go．
　　That night， or what was left of it，I could not sleep．My mind was full of confusing pictures and disturbed emotions．






■ 10 The mystery of Grace Poole
　　A fter this sleepless night I was eager to see Mr Rochester in the morning，but there was no sign of him．He had obviously told the servants that he had accidentally set fire to his room by knocking over a lighted candle As I passed his bedroom，I saw Grace Poole sitting inside，calmly mending the curtains She certainly did not look desperate or mad enough to have tried to murder her master But I decided to investigate．
　　Good morning，Grace，I said，entering the room．'Tell me，what happened last night？The servants are talking about it．'
　　'Good morning，miss，'she replied， looking up innocently．'Well，master was reading in bed and fell asleep，so he must have knocked the candle over It set fire to the sheets，but luckily he managed to put the flames out with some water．
　　'How strange！'I said quietly．'Didn't anybody hear what was happening？At this，she seemed to examine me carefully．
　　Mrs Fairfax and you sleep nearest this room，miss Mrs Fairfax is a heavy sleeper，like most old people，and didn't hear anything But you'rs young，miss．Perhaps you heard a noise？' 'I did，'I whispered．'I'm sure I heard a strange laugh．'
　　She went on sewing calmly
　　'I don't think master would have laughed，when he was in such danger，'she said．'You must have been dreaming．'
　　'No，I wasn't dreaming，'I replied sharply． 'You didn't think of opening your door and looking out into the corridor？'she asked．I suddenly realized that if she suspected I knew of her guilt，she might attack me．
　　'No，in fact I locked my door，'I answered，'and I shall lock it every night from now on．'
　　That's wise of you，miss We might have burglars at Thornfield one day，you never know．
　　I was amazed by her self-control，and could not understand why Mr Rochester had not asked the police to arrest her，or at least dismissed her from his service．Why had he asked me to keep the attack a secret？How could such a proud gentleman be so much in the power of one of his servants that he could not even punish her for trying to kill him？Did she know a terrible secret fron his past，which she had threatened to tell？Could he ever have been in love with her？'NO，I thought，'he could never love anyone as plain and coarse as she is．But then，I'm not beautiful either，and I sometimes think he loves me．Last night-his words，his look，his voice!'And my cheeks were red as I thought of those precious moments
　　I was now even more impatient to see Mr Rochester，but when I was having tea with Mrs Fairfax in the afternoon，the first thing she said was，It's fine weather for the master's journey．'
　　'Journey!'I cried．'I didn't know he'd gone anywhere!'
　　'Oh yes，he went off just after breakfast，to visit a family in a big house about sixteen miles away．I know they've invited a lot of guests，who'll be staying in the house．Mr Rochester is always very popular with the ladies at these parties，so he may not come back for a week or so．'
　　'Who are the ladies at this house-party？
　　'Three sisters，very elegant young ladies，and their friends，Blanche and Mary Ingram．But Blanche is the most beautiful of all．I saw her when she came to a Christmas party at Thornfield，six or seven years ago．'
　　'What does she look like？'
　　'She was eighteen then，a lovely girl，with beautiful skin，long curling black hair，and fine black eyes which shone as brightly as her jewels．She looked like a queen．All the gentlemen admired her，not only for her beauty but also for her musical skills．When she and Mr Rochester sang together，it was a delight to hear．'
　　'Mr Rochester？I didn't know he could sing．'
　　'Oh yes，he has a very fine voice．And then she played the piano later．The master said she played extremely well．'
　　'And this beautiful lady isn't married yet？'
　　'No，I don't think she or her sister has much money．'
　　'But I'm surprised some rich gentleman hasn't fallen in love with her．Mr Rochester，for example．He's rich，isn't he？'
　　'Oh yes But you see，there's a considerable difference in age．He's nearly forty，and she's only twenty-five．'
　　'Well，marriages like that happen every day．De you think-'But I was interrupted by Adele，who came to Join us，and the subject was changed．
　　That night in my room I was stern with myself．
　　'You，Jane Eyre，'I accused my reflection in the mirror，'you are the biggest fool in the world! How could you imagine that a gentleman of family and wealth would love you，a plain little governess! Just look at yourself!'And I decided that next day I would draw an honest sketch of myself，and then one of Blanche Ingram，painting the most lovely face I could imagine，according to Mrs Fairfax 's description．In the future，if ever my old feelings about Mr Rochester began to return，I would only have to glance at the two pictures to see the great difference between us，and in this way common sense would destroy my foolish dreams.






■ 11 The Thornfield house-party
　　T wo disappointing weeks passed before we heard from Mr Rochester again．During this time I tried hard to forget my feeling for him．I reminded myself that he paid me to teach Adèle，nothing more，and that no other relationship could exist between us．When his letter finally came，Mrs Fairfax announced with great excitement that he was planning a house-party at Thornfield．He was going to return in three days'time，and had invited a large number of ladies and gentlemen to stay for several days．We all worked extremely hard in the next few days，cleaning all the rooms and preparing the food．
　　The only person in the house who did not appear excited was Grace Poole，who stayed in her room upstairs，coming down once a day for food and drink．None of the servants seemed at all curious about her，but I once heard two of the maids talking，and I listened when I caught her name
　　Does Grace Poole earn a lot，then？ asked one．
　　'Oh yes，live times what you and I earn！'answered the other．
　　'But she's good at the work，I expect，'said the first． 'Ah！She understands what she has to do，that's true，answered the second，'and not everyone would want to do her job，not even for all that money！'
　　'Quite right！I wonder whether the master-'Suddenly they saw me and broke off their conversation
　　'Doesn 't she know？I heard one of them whisper．
　　'No，'said the other，and they were silent．So I realized there was a secret at Thornfield，which nobody wanted to tell me．
　　At last the great day came Everything was ready for the master and his guests．Adele and I watched from an upstairs window as the carriages arrived．In front rode Mr Rochester on his black horse，and with him rode a beautiful lady，her black curls streaming in the wind．Blanche Ingram！'I thought We listened to the laughing and talking in the hall，as the guests were welcomed by their host and his house-keeper From a dark corner of the stairs we admired the ladies as they went up to their rooms，and then again as they descended to dinner in their elegant evening dresses．Adèle was hoping Mr Rochester would call her down to meet the guests，but in the end she was so tired with all the excitement that she and I both went to bed early．
　　Next morning after breakfast the whole group went out for the day．Again I saw Mr Rochester and Blanche Ingram riding together．I pointed this out to Mrs Fairfax．
　　'You see，Mr Rochester clearly prefers her to any of the other ladies．'
　　'Yes，he does seem to admire her，'admitted the housekeeper．
　　'And she admires him．Notice how she looks at him！But I haven't really seen her face yet．I'd like to．”
　　'You'll see her tonight，'answered Mrs Fairfax．'I mentioned to the master that Adèle wanted to be introduced to the ladies，and he asked you to bring her down to meet them this evening．'
　　'Well，I'll go if he wants me to，but I don't like meeting strangers．I'm not used to it．'
　　'I understand how you feel，'said the old lady kindly，'but the guests won't notice you much，and you can easily escape after a short time．'
　　So Adèle and I，dressed in our best，were waiting as the ladies came into the sitting-room after dinner．I was most impressed by the beauty and elegance of all of them，but was especially fascinated by the Ingram family .Lady Ingram，although between forty and fifty，was still a fine woman．Her hair still looked black，by candle-light at least，and her teeth still seemed perfect．But she had fierce，proud eyes，that reminded me of aunt Reed's，and a hard，powerful voice．Her daughter Mary was rather quiet，but her other daughter Blanche was very different．As soon as the gentlemen came into the room and coffee was served，she became the centre of attention．She played the piano excellently,she sang sweetly，she discussed intelligently，and all the time her flashing eyes，rich black curls and fine figure attracted glances from every gentleman in the room．
　　But I was looking for someone else．The last time I had seen him，on the night of the fire，he had held my hands，told me I had saved his life，and looked at me as if he loved me How close we had been then！But now，he entered the room without even looking at me，and took a seat with the ladies．I could not stop looking at him rather like a thirsty man who knows the water is poisoned but cannot resist drinking．I had never intended to love him．I had tried hard to destroy all feelings of love for him，but now that I saw him again，I could not stop myself loving him．I compared him to the other gentlemen present.They were all fine，handsome men，but they did not have his power，his character，his strength，or indeed his deep laugh or his gentle smile．I felt that he and I were the same sort of person，that there was something in my brain and heart，in my blood and bone，that connected me to him for ever. And although I knew I must hide my feelings，must never allow myself to hope，I also knew that while there was breath in my body，I would always love him．
　　Just then I heard Blanche Ingram say to him，'Mr Rochester，you should have sent that little girl-Adèle，is that her name？-to school，but I see you have a governess for her．I saw a strange little person with her just now .Has she gone？Oh no，there she is in the window-seat.It's very foolish of you，you know．Governesses aren't worth their salary，are they，Mamma？'
　　'My dear，don't mention governesses to me！'cried Lady Ingram，holding a white hand to her forehead．'How I have suffered with them！'One of the older ladies whispered to her，pointing in my direction．
　　'Oh，I don't care if she hears me！'said Lady Ingram．'All governesses are useless．They never teach children anything．'
　　'What fun we used to have，playing tricks on them，didn't we，Mary？'laughed Blanche．'But governesses are boring．Let's change the subject.Mr Rochester，Will you sing with me？'
　　'with pleasure，'he answered，bowing，and the group moved towards the piano．This was the moment for me to escape，but I had only just left the sitting-room and reached the hall，when Mr Rochester appeared through another door．
　　'Come back，you're leaving too early，'he said to me．
　　'I'm tired，sir．'He looked at me for a minute．
　　'And a little depressed .Why？Tell me．'
　　'Nothing-it's nothing，sir．l'm not depressed．'
　　'But I think you are．You're almost crying．But I haven't got time now to discover the reason．Well，tonight you may leave early，but I want to see you with my guests every evening．Good night，my-'He stopped，bit his lip，and turned quickly away．
　　Those were cheerful，busy days at Thornfield The old house had never seen so，much life and activity.When it was fine the host and his guests went riding，visited places of interest，and walked in the gardens，and when it was wet they played games indoors．Mr Rochester and Blanche Ingram were always together．Observing them closely，I felt very sure that he would soon marry this fine lady．But I did not feel jealous，because I knew he did not love her．She had made every effort to attract him，but he had not given her his heart．I saw her faults very clearly．She was intelligent but had no opinions of her own．She was beautiful but not good．She spoke of feelings but she knew nothing of sympathy or pity．And above all she had her mother's pride and hardness．Other eyes apart from mine saw all these faults．Mr Rochester himself knew she was not perfect，but he was clearly preparing to marry her，perhaps because she was of good family，perhaps for some other reason．
　　One day when Mr Rochester was out alone on business，a stranger arrived in a carriage，and introduced himself as an old friend of the master's．His name was Mason，and he had just returned from the West Indies，where Mr Rochester had once lived．






■ 12 The gipsy woman
　　No sooner had Mr Mason joined the group of guests than a servant entered to announce the arrival of an old gipsy woman，who was supposed to be a skilled fortune-teller.The ladies were very excited and decided to ask her to tell their fortunes .Miss Ingram，as usual，was first，and spent fifteen minutes alone with the old woman in the library．She came back looking cross .
　　'It's just childish nonsense！How can you all believe in that sort of thing！'she said，picking up a book and pretending to read it．But as she frowned more and more，and did not turn a page，I assumed that the gipsy's words were more important to her than she wanted us to think．Next，three young ladies went in together，and came back full of praise for the gipsy's skill．
　　'She's old，and dirty， and ugly，' they cried，shocked，'but she knows everything about us，everything！'While the gentlemen were calming them down，the servant entered the room again．
　　'Excuse me，miss，'he said to me．'The gipsy says there's another young single lady in the room．She refuses to leave the house until she has seen all the young ladies．It must be you .'
　　'Oh，I'll go，'I said gladly．I was curious to see the gipsy．
　　She was sitting in an armchair in the library，murmuring
　　words over a little black book.Her large black hat covered most of her face,but when she lifted her head,I saw her dark eyes.
　　'So you want me to tell your fortune
'she asked.
　　'Well,I must warn you,I don't believe in your skill.'
　　'I expected that.why don't you tremble
'
　　'I'm not cold.'
　　'Why don't you turn pale
'
　　'I'm not ill.'
　　'Why don't you ask me to tell your fortune
'
　　'I'm not a fool.'
　　The old woman laughed and started smoking a short black pipe.
　　'I can prove that you're cold,and ill,and a fool,'she said.'Listen.You're cold,because you're alone.You're ill,because you lack love.And you're a fool,because love is near you,and you won't take one step to reach it.'
　　'That's true of many people,'I said, interested.
　　'Yes,but especially true of you.I can see that happiness is waiting for you, if you really want it．Tell me,in that room of fine people,isn't there one face you look at ,one person you're interested in 
'
　　' I hardly know the ladies and gentlemen here,' I answered.
　　'Well,you serely know the master of the house
What do you think of his relationship with his guests, and with one particular guest
' asked the gipsy, smiling wickedly.
　　'They're all very friendly with each other，'I replied cautiously．The gipsy seemed to know a lot about Thornfield．
　　'Friendly！I'd say more than that，in fact I'd go so far as to mention the name of Blanche Ingram and the word，marriage．They will obviously be an extremely happy couple，although I told Miss Ingram something about the Rochester property which made her look quite depressed．If a wealthier gentleman comes along，Mr Rchester might lose his beautiful bride…'
　　But I came to hear about my future，not Mr Rochester's！
　　'It depends on whether you're going to stretch out your hand for happiness．Let me look at your face．Your eyes and your mouth show me that feelings are important to you，but your forehead shows me that common sense is your main guide in life．You will never do anything wrong or shameful．Well，I respect that．I don't want sacrifice or sorrow in my life．I want-but that will do．I'd like to stay here looking at you for ever，but I must stop acting now．'
　　Was I dreaming？What was happening？The old woman's voice had changed and become as familiar to me as my own．
　　'Well，Jane，do you know me？'asked the familiar voice．And，struggling with the old clothes，Mr Rochester stepped out of his disguise．
　　Sir，you've been talking nonsense to make me talk nonsense．It's hardly fair．'
　　'De you forgive me，Jane？'
　　'I shall try to，sir．But you shouldn't have done it．
　　'What are my guests doing，Jane？'
　　'Discussing the gipsy，I imagine．Oh，and did you know that a stranger has arrived to see you？'
　　'A stranger！I wasn't expecting anyone．Who can it be？'
　　'His name's Mason，sir，and he comes from the West Indies．
　　The smile froze on Mr Rochester's lips，and his face went White．
　　'Mason！The west Indies！'he repeated three times．
　　'Do you feel ill，sir？'I asked，worried．
　　'Jane，help me，'he murmured，almost falling．I helped him to sit down，and sat with him．He took my hand and rubbed it gently．
　　'I wish I were on an island with you and nobody else，with no trouble or danger or terrible memories to make me suffer．
　　'How can I help you，sir？I'd give my life to help you．'
　　'Jane，if I need help，I'll ask you，I promise．Get me a glass of wine now．'I fetched one from the dining-room，and gave it to him．He looked less pale，but very stern．
　　'Jane，if all those fine guests of mine came and spat at me，what would you do？'he asked．
　　'Turn them out of the house，sir，if I could．'
　　'But if they only looked at me coldly，and whispered behind their hands about me，and then left me one by one？
　　'I'd stay with you，sir，to comfort you．'
　　'And if the whole world disapproved of me，would you still stay with me？'
　　'If you deserved my friendship，as I'm sure you do，I wouldn't care about other people's disapproval．
　　'Thank you，Jane．Now go and ask Mr Mason to come and see me．'So I did，and，leaving the two men in the library，went to bed．
　　Much later I heard him showing Mr Mason to his bedroom，and was glad that Mr Rochester sounded so cheerful．






■ 13 The stranger is attacked
　　I was woken by the full moon shining in on me，as I had forgotten to draw my curtains．Suddenly，a wild，terrible cry broke the silence，echoing throughout the house．My heart missed a beat．What could it mean？It came from the top floor．Then I heard the sounds of a desperate struggle，just above my room．
　　'Are you awake，Jane？'asked the voice I had been expecting.
　　'Yes，sir，and dressed．'
　　'Good，I need you．Come and help me．Bring a clean cloth with you．'We went quietly up to the top floor，where he unlocked one of the small black doors．
　　'Do you feel faint at the sight of blood？'he asked．
　　'I don't think so，'I replied．We entered a room with curtains hung on the walls．One of the curtains was tied back to reveal a secret door into another small room．From there came an angry growling sound，almost like a dog．
　　'Wait here，'said Mr Rochester，and Went into the secret room where a shout of laughter greeted him．Ah，so Grace Poole was there！He came out quickly and closed the secret door．Then he showed me why he needed me．In an armchair lay Mr Mason，his clothes and his arm covered in blood。As we bent over him，he opened his eyes and groaned．
　　'Am I going to die？'he murmured weakly．
　　'No，man，don't be foolish．It's just a scratch，'answered Mr Rochester．'Now jane，'he said，turming to me，have to leave you in this room with Mason while I fetch the doctor．You must wipe away the blood with the damp cloth，like this，and help him to drink a little water．But on no account must you speak to him．Is that understood？'I nodded，and nervously watched him leave the room．I could hear him turning the key in the lock．
　　So here I was，in the middle of the night，locked in with a bleeding，dying man，and a wild，murdering woman only on the other side of a door！It seemed a long night，interrupted only by Mason's groans，and by occasional animal-like noises from the secret room．I had plenty of time to wonder why these violent attacks happened，first the fire in Mr Rochester's room，and now a physical attack on a stranger．And how was Mr Mason involved？Why was he here on the top floor？I had heard his host showing him to a bedroom near mine，on the second floor．And why was Mr Rochester so frightened when Mr Mason came to Thornfield？
　　At last Mr Rochester arrived with the doctor，who cleaned and bandaged Mason's wounds．
　　'Strange！'remarked the doctor，'The skin on the shoulder has been torn by teeth，as well as a knife！'
　　'She bit me，murmured Mason，when Rochester managed to get the knife from her．'
　　'Well，I warned you not to see her alone，'said Rochester．'You should have waited till the morning，then we could have seen her together．Den't worry，man，when you get back to the West Indies，you can forget her．Think of her as dead and buried．Now，doctor，is Mason ready to be moved？I have a carriage waiting outside You'll take him home with you to avoid gossip，and then in a few days he'll be fit enough to leave the country．
　　Although it was now early morning，the house was still in total silence，and so there were no witnesses to see Mason being helped downstalrs and put in the carriage．
　　'Look after him，doctor．'said Rochester．'Goodbye，Dick．'
　　'Edward，make sure she's taken care of，make sure she's treated well… Mason could not continue，but burst into tears．
　　'I'll do my best，Dick，as I always have done，'replied Rochester，shutting the door of the carriage，which rolled away．'But I wish there was an end to it！'he murmured to himself．
　　As we were walking back through the garden to the house，he said to me，'Jane，you've had a strange night．You look pale．Were you afraid when I left you alone with Mason？'
　　'Not of Mason，sir，but of Grace Poole in the secret room．'
　　'But I'd locked her door．I would never leave you in danger．'
　　'Will she go on living here，sir？'I asked．
　　'Oh yes．Don't think about her．'
　　'But I'm sure your life is in danger while she's here．'
　　'Den't worry，I can take care of myself．I'm in more danger while Mason's in England．I live in constant fear of a disaster.'
　　'But Mr Mason's weak！You have great influence with him！'
　　'Yes．He wouldn't knowingly hurt me，but by one careless word he could destroy，if not my life，at least my chance of happiness.Sit down with me on this bench，Jane．I want to ask you something．
　　The early sun warmed the bench and the birds were singing．Now，Jane，suppose a boy in a foreign country makes a mistake，not a crime， mind you．The results of this mistake have a terrible effect on his whole life．He comes home aftef years of suffering，and meets someone，who is fresh and good and pure.Now，can he ignore society，can he forget the past,and live the rest of his life with her in peace？'
　　It was a difficult question to answer．In the end I said，
　　'You can't rely on a human being to cure you of evil and give you peace．You must ask for God's help．'
　　'But I think I've found the cure！It's… He paused．I held my breath．I almost thought the birds would stop singing to hear the name he was going to say．
　　'Yes，'he said in quite a different，hard voice，you've noticed my love for Miss Ingram，haven't you？Don't you think she'll cure me of my wickedness，Jane？Oh，I can hear some of the guests in the garden．Go into the house by the back door．'As I went one way，and he another，I heard him say cheerfully to the gentlemen，'Mason's already left．I got up early to say goodbye to him．'






■ 14 Trouble at Gateshead
　　hen I was a child at Gateshead，Bessie the nursemaid
　　used to say that to dream of children was a sure sign of trouble to come．For a whole week now I had dreamed of a small child every night，and perhaps Bessie was right，as a message came from Gateshead.
　　It appeared that my cousin John Reed，who had spent and wasted all his money and some of his mother's，and been in debt or in prison Most of his life，had killed himself a week before And then Mrs Reed，whose health had been badly affected by worrying about her son，had suddenly fallen ill when she heard of his death Although she could hardly speak，she had recently managed to express a wish to see me And so my cousins Eliza and Georgiana had sent their coachman，Robert，to bring me back to Gateshead
　　I felt I could not refuse to see my aunt，perhaps for the last time，So I went to ask Mr Rochester's permisson to leave Thornfield for a while I found him talking to Miss Ingram，who looked at me in disgust when I interrupted their conversation.
　　'Well，Jane，what is it？'he asked，when we had left the room full of guests and gone into the library．
　　'Please，sir，I would like permission to visit my aunt，who is ill，for a week or two．
　　'Your aunt！You told me you had no relations！'
　　'I have none who，love me，sir．She's Mrs Reed，my uncle's wife.Her son has died recently．I really can't neglect her now that she is dying．
　　'What nonsense，Jane，rushing off to visit an old lady who has never loved you！But I see you've decided to go．Where does she live and how long will you stay？'
　　'She lives at Gateshead，sir，a hundred miles away．I'll stay as short a time as can．
　　'Promise me only to stay a week．
　　I can't promise，sir，I might have to stay longer．
　　'And you certainly can't travel a hundred miles alone！'
　　'They've sent the coachman for me，sir．I'll leave tomorrow.'
　　Mr Rochester thought for a while．
　　'Well，you'll need some money．I haven't paid you any salary yet．How much have you in the world，Jane？' he asked，smiling.
　　I showed him my tiny purse．He took it and laughed as he counted the few coins．Then he took out his wallet．
　　'Here is ￡50，'he said，offering me a note．
　　'But.you only owe me ￡15，sir！'I cried．
　　'On second thoughts，give me that back. If you had&50，perhaps you would stay away for three months．Here is ￡ 10．Is that enough？'
　　'Now you owe me&5，sir，'I pointed out．
　　'You'll have to come back for it then，'he said，laughing．
　　'There's something else，sir．You've told me you'rs going to marry soon. In that case，Adèle should go to boarding school．'
　　'To get her out of my lovely bride's way？A very sensible suggestion．But what about you？'
　　'I must find another job somewhere．I'll advertise．'
　　'Don't you dare！'he growled.'Promise me，Jane，not to look for another job．I'll take care of that.'
　　'I'll promise，sir，if you promise that Adèle and I will be out of your house before your bride enters it.'
　　'Very well！And now we must say goodbye．'
　　'Goodbye，Mr Rochester.'
　　I set out early the next morning and travelled all day．As I approached Gateshead Hall，I realized it was nine years since I had left it. In that time I had made some friends， gained much self-confidence，and finally lost my hatred of the Reeds．
　　I was delighted to see my old friend Bessie again．She had married Robert the coachman，and was very busy with her three young children．The house itself had not changed at all，hut my cousins certainly had. Eliza was now very tall and thin, with a rather sour face，dressed in very plain clothes，and with a cross hanging round her neck Georgiana，on the other hand，was still pretty hut very fat，and wore extremely fashionable clothes．They did not seem pleased to see me，in fact they more or less ignored me，but I hardly noticed their rudeness．I told the housekeeper that I would be staying for several days，and then went straight to my aunt's room．
　　I remembered it well from my childhood．I had often been called there to be punished．Bending over her bed I kissed her．
　　'How are you，dear aunt？'I asked．I had sworn never to call her aunt again，but I did not regret breaking that promise to myself．I held her hand．
　　'Are you Jane Eyre？'she asked．Her face，although deathly pale，was as stern as ever，and she removed her hand from mine．'That child was more trouble to me than anyone would believe！I was glad to send her to Lowood．And John！Poor John！He needs so much money！Where can I get more money from？What will happen？ She seemed very confused and excited，so I left her to sleep．
　　Her illness got worse in the next few days．I spent some time every day looking after her，and the rest of the time with my cousins，listening to their plans for the future．Eliza was planning to joln a religious community after her mother's death，but Georgiana was hoping to stay in London with relations，to see the new fashions and go to all the parties．It was quite clear they had no real feeling for their mother，and were almost looking forward to her death．
　　One dark，stormy night I visited the dying woman．She lay there asleep in her room，neglected by her daughters and servants．As I looked out of the window into the black emptiness，I wondered about the great mystery of death，and thought of Helen Burns，who was so sure her spirit would go to heaven．Would my aunt's spirit go there too？
　　'Who are you？'I heard the sick woman Murmuring．'I wanted to see Jane Eyre．I must tell her something．
　　'I am Jane Eyre，aunt，'I told her gently．
　　'I know I'm very ill，'she said weakly．'Before I die I must confess what I've done wrong．First，I broke my promise to my husband about you，and second She broke off.'After all，perhaps I don't need to tell her，'she said to herself and then，'No，it's no good，I know I'm dying．I must tell her，and quickly！Jane eyre，take the letter from the top drawer of my desk，and read it.'I did so.It said：
　　'Why did I never hear of this'？I asked，amazed．
　　'I hated you so much that I wrote，back to Him，telling him you had died of typhus fever at Lowood That was my revenge on you，for causing me so much trouble！'she cried angrily.
　　'Dear aunt，'I said，'don't think about that any more I was omly a child，it's not surprising I was a nuisance.'
　　'You were always so angry and violent，such a wicked child！'
　　'Not as wicked as you think．I would have loved you if you'd let me．Forget it all and kiss me now，aunt．'But it was too late for her to break the habit of dislike，and she turned away from me． Poor woman！She died soon afterwards，keeping her hatred of me alive in her heart，and no one at Gateshead cried for her．






■ 15 The future Mrs Rochester
　　And so I set out on the long journey back to Thornfield．Mrs Fairfax had written to me while I was at Gateshead，telling me that the guests had all gone，and Mr Rochester had gone to London to buy a carriage for his wedding．It was clear that he would be getting married very soon．
　　After a long day sitting in the coach，I decided to get out at Millcote，leave my luggage at the hotel， and walk across the fields to Thornfield．It was a warm June evening，and I felt glad to be going home．I had to remind myself sternly that Thornfield was not my permanent home，and that the person I was so looking forward to seeing was perhaps not even thinking of me．
　　And then I saw him！He was sitting on the gate ahead of me，writing in a notebook He noticed me at once． 'Hallo！'he cried．I was trembling at the unexpected sight of him，and could not control my voice，so I approached in silence．
　　'So it's Jane Eyre！'he continued．'Why didn't you send for a carriage？It's just like you to come on foot from Millcote Now，what have you been doing for a whole month？'
　　'I've been looking after my aunt，sir，who's just died．'
　　'You come from another world，Jane，from the world of the dead．I think you must be a spirit．And absent for a whole month！I'm sure you've quite forgotten me．'
　　Even though I knew I would soon lose him，he had such power to make me happy that I was in heaven listening to him．
　　'Did Mrs Fairfax tell you I've been to London？'he asked．
　　'Oh yes，sir，she did．'
　　'And I expect she told you why I went there？Well，you must see the carriage I've bought，Jane．It will suit Mrs Rochester perfectly．I only wish I were more handsome， as she's so beautiful．Can't you put one of your spells on me，to make me more attractive for her？'
　　'That's beyond the power of magic，sir，'I replied，while thinking，'To someone who loves you，you are handsome enough．'
　　Mr Rochester was sometimes able to read my thoughts， but this time he just smiled warmly at me，and opened the gate．
　　'Pass，friend，'he said，'and welcome home！'
　　I could have just walked past him in silence，but something made me turn and say quickly，before I could stop myself，'Thank you，Mr Rochester，for your great kindness．'I'm glad to come back to you，and wherever you are is my home—my only home．'I ran across the field and into the house before he had time to answer．
　　Two weeks passed after my return， with no news of the wedding．There were no preparations at Thornfield，and no visits to the Ingram family，who lived only a few miles away．I almost began to hope．
　　It was the middle of summer，and every day the sun shone on the green fields，the white，baked roads，and the cool，dark woods．One evening， after Adele had gone to sleep，I went into the garden．I discovered a quiet place where I thought nobody would find me，but then I noticed Mr Rochester had come into the garden too．Hoping to escape back to the house，I crept quietly behind him while he was bending over to admire an insect，but—
　　'Jane，'he said suddenly，'come and look at this beautiful insect．Oh，now he's flown away．No，don't go back to the house，Jane，on such a lovely night．Come and walk with me．'I could not find a reason for leaving him， so I accompanied him in silence．
　　'Jane，'he began，'you like Thornfield，don't you？And you even like little Adele，and old Mrs Fairfax，don't you？'
　　'I do，sir，I really don't want to leave them．'
　　'What a pity！'he sighed．'That's what happens in life．No sooner have you got used to a place than you have to move on．'
　　'Do I have to move on，sir？Leave Thornfield？'
　　'I'm afraid you must， Jane．'
　　'Then you are going to be married，sir？'
　　'Exactly，Jane．And as you have pointed out，when I take the lovely Miss Ingram as my bride，you and Adele must leave the house，so I'm looking for a new job for you．'
　　'I'm sorry to cause you trouble，'I said miserably．
　　'No trouble at all！In fact I've already heard of a very good job which would be just right for you，teaching the five daughters of an Irish family．You'll like Ireland，I think．They're such friendly people，'he said cheerfully．
　　'It's such a long way away， sir！'I was fighting to keep my tears back．There was an icy coldness in my heart．
　　'Away from what，Jane？'
　　'From England and from Thornfield and—'
　　'Well？'
　　'From you，sir！'I could not stop myself，and burst into tears immediately．
　　'It certainly is very far away，'he said calmly．'Let's sit on this bench，Jane，like old friends saying goodbye．You know，I sometimes feel as if you and I were connected by a string tying our two hearts together，and if you went to Ireland，I think that string might break and I might bleed to death．' 'I wish…I wish I'd never been born！'I cried．'I wish I'd never come to Thornfield！'No longer able to control my feelings，I poured out what was in my heart．'I can't bear to leave！Because here I've been treated kindly．And because I've met you，Mr Rochester，and I can't bear never to see you again．Now I have to leave，I feel as if I'm dying！'
　　'Why do you have to leave？'he asked innocently．
　　'Why？'I repeated，amazed．'Because you're marrying Miss Ingram—she's your bride！'
　　'My bride！I have no bride！'he answered．'But I will have one，and you must stay！'
　　'I can't stay！'I cried furiously．'Do you think I can watch another woman become your bride？Do you think I'm a machine，without feelings？Do you think，because I'm small and poor and plain，that I have no soul and no heart？Well，you're wrong！I have as much soul and heart as you．It is my spirit that speaks to your spirit！We are equal in the sight of God！'
　　'We are！'repeated Mr Rochester， taking me in his arms and kissing me．'Don't struggle，Jane，like a wild restless bird！'
　　'Let me go，Mr Rochester．I am no bird，but a free human being．'And I managed to break away．
　　'Yes，Jane，you are free to decide．I ask you to walk through life with me，to be my constant companion．'
　　'You're laughing at me．You've already chosen your companion for life．'I was crying quietly，while Mr Rochester looked gently and seriously at me．
　　'Jane，'he said，'I ask you to be my wife．You are my equal，Jane．Will you marry me？Don't you believe me？'
　　'Not at all，'I answered．
　　'I'll convince you！Listen，I don't love Miss Ingram and she doesn't love me．She only liked me for my wealth，and when I，disguised as the gipsy woman，told her that I had only a little money，she and her mother lost interest in me．You strange magical spirit，I love you！You，small and poor and plain，I ask you to marry me！'
　　'You want to marry me？'I cried，almost beginning to believe him．'But I have no friends，no money，no family！'
　　'I don't care，Jane！Say yes，quickly！It's cruel to make me suffer like this！Give me my name，say，“Edward，I'll marry you！”'he cried，his face very pale in the moonlight．
　　'Are you serious？Do you really love me？ Do you honestly want me to be your wife？'I asked．
　　'I swear it．'
　　'Then，Edward，I will marry you．'
　　'My little wife！'He held me in his arms for a long time，kissing me gently．Once he murmured，'No family！That's good．No family to interfere！'and then，'I don't care what people think！'and again and again，'Are you happy，Jane？'I thought of nothing except the great happiness of being with him for ever．
　　But while we were talking the weather had changed．A strong wind was now blowing and there was a loud crack of thunder．Suddenly rain poured down，and although we hurried back to the house，we were quite wet when we arrived in the hall．We did not notice Mrs Fairfax standing in the shadows．
　　'Good night，my darling，'he said，kissing me repeatedly．As I ran upstairs，I caught sight of the old lady's shocked face．
　　'Tomorrow I'll explain to her，'I thought．Just then I was too happy to think about anything except our bright future．
　　Outside，the storm continued furiously all night，and in the morning we discovered that the great tree at the bottom of the garden，which had stood for hundreds of years，had been hit by lightning and torn in half．






■ 16 Preparing for the wedding
　　I was a little nervous before seeing Mr Rochester next morning．Was I really going to marry him， or was it all a dream？But I soon felt calmer when he came to meet me and kissed me．
　　'Jane，you look well and smiling and pretty，'he said．'You will be Jane Rochester in four weeks' time，not a day more．I'll send for my family jewels，which are kept in a London bank．They are for my bride，whether she's a great lady or a governess．'
　　'Oh no，sir！' I cried．'I'm too plain for jewels！I'm not used to wearing them．'
　　'I insist，Jane．Today I'm taking you in the carriage to Millcote to buy you some elegant clothes．In a month's time we'll have a quiet wedding in the local church，and after a few days in London we'll travel through all the countries of Europe．'
　　'Well，sir，you seem very eager to please me，but I wonder if you will agree to a request of mine．'
　　'Ask me anything，Jane，anything！'
　　'Indeed I will．This is my request．I ask you not to give me jewels and fine clothes．'
　　'If that's really your wish，I agree But can't you think of anything I can give you？'
　　'Well，I'd like you to give me the answer to a question．'
　　He looked worried，and turned away from me．
　　'Curiosity is dangerous，'he said．'I may not be able to agree to this particular request．Well，what is it？'
　　'How stern you look！I suppose that's how you will look when we are married！This is what I want to know．Why did you take such trouble to make me believe you wished to marry Miss Ingram？'
　　He stopped frowning at once and smiled down at me．
　　'Is that all？What a relief！All right，I shall have to confess，although you may be angry with me，Jane—as angry as you were last night，when you told me we were equal．Well，I pretended to love Miss Ingram to make you madly jealous．I wanted you to be as much in love wlth me as I was with you．'
　　'And I suppose you didn't care at all about poor Miss Ingram's feelings？'
　　'She only has one feeling—pride．Were you jealous，Jane？'
　　'Never mind，Mr Rochester．One more request—please explain everything to Mrs Fairfax．She looked so shocked last night！'
　　When I visited the old housekeeper later that day，I found she was amazed by the news that I was going to marry the master．
　　'I would never have thought it！'she kept repeating．'Mr Rochester，so proud and such a gentleman！To marry his governess！'She examined me closely，as if to discover the reason for this strange event，and shook her head，still puzzled．'He's twenty years older than you！He could be your father！'
　　'No，indeed，Mrs Fairfax，'I replied crossly．'He looks much younger than that！'
　　'Is he really going to marry you for love？'she asked．
　　I was so hurt by her amazement that tears came to my eyes．
　　'Why？'I asked．'Do you think he couldn't possibly love me？'
　　'No，no，Miss Eyre，but you must realize that this is a very unusual situation．You must be careful of your reputation． I advise you to keep him at a distance until you are married．'
　　Although I was upset by the old lady's words，I followed her advice，and in the weeks before the wedding I went on teaching Adele as usual．Only in the evenings did I spend some time with Mr Rochester，and I was careful not to allow him to hold me in his arms or kiss me．Sometimes he was angry with me and called me a'hard little thing'or'a cruel spirit'，but I preferred that to being called 'my darling'．I saw that Mrs Fairfax approved of my correct behaviour，and I knew that he respected me for it．But it was not easy for me．I would rather have shown him my love．My future husband was becoming my whole world，and more than that，my hope of heaven．
　　At last the night before the wedding arrived．My clothes were packed and I was ready．But I was anxious to see Mr Rochester，who had been away on business，so I ran out of the quiet house to meet him on the road. A wild，stormy wind was blowing，and in the garden I passed the wreck of the great tree Then suddenly I saw him riding towards me．
　　'You see！'he shouted．'You can't do without me！Jump up onto my horse！'Together we rode back to Thornfield．While he ate dinner，I sat quietly beside him．He looked closely at me．
　　'You look sad，Jane，'he said．'Is anything wrong？Are you nervous about your new life？'
　　'No，'I replied firmly．'I'm not worried about that，because I love you．But last night I had a strange dream，a terrible dream！It was dark and windy outside，and before I went to sleep I could hear a dog growling in the distance．In my dream I was carrying a small child in my arms down a long road．I was trying to catch up with you，but I couldn't． '
　　'And you still worry about a foolish dream，when I'm close to you？But say you love me again，Jane．'
　　'I do love you，Edward．But I haven't finished my story．'
　　'Is there more？Well，go on．'
　　'I dreamed that Thornfield was totally destroyed，just a heap of stones．I was still carrying the child，but now I could see you riding away into the distance．I knew you would never come back！Then I woke up．'
　　'That's all then，Jane．Nothing to worry about．'
　　'No，wait．There was candle-light in my room，and a strange shape examining the wedding dress hanging in my cupboard．My blood ran cold．It wasn't Mrs Fairfax or any of the servants，it wasnt't even Grace Poole．It was a horrible sight！'
　　'Describe the shape，Jane．'
　　'It looked like a tall woman，with long thick dark hair hanging down hhe took up the beautiful veil you bought me，put it on her own head，then turned to admire herself in the mirror．It was then that I saw her wild，inhuman face！She removed the veil，tore it in two and threw it on the floor．'
　　'And then？'Mr Rochester seemed almost nervous．
　　'She came to my bedside，put her candle close to my face and stared fiercely at me．I must have fainted，and I suppose she left．Now can you tell me who or what that woman was？'
　　'Jane，you are too sensitive．That was just a dream． Don't think about it any more！'he answered comfortingly．
　　'That's just what I said to myself when I woke up this morning，but when I looked on the floor，there was me veil，torn in two halves！'I felt Mr Rochester suddenly tremble．
　　'To think what might have happened！'he cried，throwing his arms around me．'Thank God it was only the veil！'After a few moments he said calmly，'Now，Jane，be sensible．That woman must have been Grace Poole．There is no other explanation．'
　　'Perhaps you're right，'I admitted slowly．
　　'One day I'll explain to you why I keep her in my house．But tonight，go and sleep in Adele's room You'll be quite safe there．Just dream about our future！'






■ 17 The wedding day
　　We had no friends or family to accompany us to the church．I had not told my Reed cousins about our wedding，but I had written to my uncle，John Eyre，in Madeira．Mr Rochester was in such a hurry that he only allowed me a short time to put on my wedding dress and veil．
　　'Jane，you look lovely，'he said．'But you can only have ten minutes for breakfast！'We almost ran up the road to the church，his strong hand holding mine．His dark face looked stern，and he did not speak．I did not notice the weather or my surroundings at all，I only wanted to know why he looked so fierce．Suddenly he noticed how pale I was，and stopped for a moment to let me get my breath back ．Then we walked more slowly into the church．
　　The priest and the clerk were waiting for us．There was nobody else except two strangers who were standing at the back of the church．The ceremony began，and soon I heard the priest come to the point in the wedding where he had to ask，'Is there any reason why these two people should not be married？'
　　The priest paused for a second，as was the custom，but before he could continue，a voice from the back of the church said clearly，
　　'There is a reason．'
　　The priest looked up from his book， and stood silent． Mr Rochester said in his deep voice，without turning his head，'Continue with the ceremony．'
　　Silence fell again．Then the priest shook his head．'I must investigate this first，'he said．One of the strangers from the back of the church came forward and said，calmly and quietly，
　　'This wedding cannot continue，because Mr Rochester is already married．'
　　I felt as if I had been hit．Mr Rochester's whole face was like colourless marble．Without speaking or smiling，he was holding me tightly round the waist，as if he wodld never let go．
　　'Who are you？'he growled at the stranger．'And tell me what you know of this supposed wife of mine．'
　　'I'm a lawyer，sir．I have a certificate here proving that you married Bertha Mason in the West Indies fifteen years ago．'
　　'That may prove I've been married，but it doesn't prove that she's still alive．'
　　'I can produce a witness，'said the lawyer，'who has seen her alive recently．'
　　'Produce him—or go to hell！'said Mr Rochester．
　　'Here he is．Mr Mason！'called the lawyer．And the second stranger slowly spproached from the shadows，his pale face looking frightened．Mr Rochester，staring furiously at him，raised his strong right arm to knock him down．
　　'No！'cried Mason，trembling．Mr Rochester dropped his arm，and turned away in disgust．
　　'Sir，'said the priest，frowning，'don't forget we are in the house of God．Mr Mason，please tell us if this gentleman's wife is still alive．'
　　'She's at Thornfield Hall，'replied Mason in a weak voice．'I'm her brother and I've seen her there．'
　　'Thornfield Hall！'crled the priest．'I've lived here for years，and I've never heard of a Mrs Rochester！'
　　'I was careful to keep her a secret，'murmured Mr Rochester，frowning After a few minutes'thought，he announced，'I must reveal the truth，I suppose．There will be no wedding today．No doubt God will punish me for this．What this lawyer says is true．I've been married，and my wife still lives！I was tricked into marrying her when I was young，in the West Indies Madness runs in her family，but they didn't tell me that．Now she's more of an anlmal than a woman．I keep her locked away，guarded by my old servant Grace Poole．I invite you all to come to my house to see her，and to judge whether I had the right to ask this innocent young girl to marry me．Follow me！'
　　Still holding me firmly，he left the church，followed by the others．At the door of Thornfield Hall，Mrs Faurfax，Adele and the servants rushed forward，smiling，to congratulate us．
　　'Too late！'cried the master，waving them away．'Your congratulations are fifteen years too late！'We all went up to the top floor，and entered the room where Mason had been attacked．Mr Rochester lifted the curtain，opened the secret door and showed us the little room．Grace Poole was making soup over a fire，and behind her a shape crawled on the floor．It was hard to say whether it was animal or human．It growled like a wild animal，but it wore clothes，and had long，thick，dark hair．
　　'How are you，Mrs Poole？'asked the master．'And how is your patient today？'
　　'Not bad，sir，'answered Grace，'but be careful．She'll try and bite you if she sees you，sir．'Just then the shape turned and with a fierce cry attacked Mr Rochester violently．I recognized her dark，ugly face．They struggled for a moment，and then he held her down and，with Mrs Poole's help，tied her to a chair．He turned to the others with a bitter smile．
　　'You see，gentlemen，this is my wife．This is the partner I have to live with for ever．And instead I wished to have this'（laying his hand on my shoulder）'…this young girl．Can you honestly blame me？Compare the two，and then judge me！'
　　We all left the room silently．As we went downstairs the lawyer said to me，'I know you weren't aware of this，Miss Eyre．Nobody will blame you，and Mr Mason will tell your uncle so，when he goes back to Madeira．'
　　'My uncle！Do you know him？'I asked，surprised． 'I'm his lawyer．Mr Mason and he have often done business together．On his way back to the West Indies，Mr Mason stopped in Madeira and stayed with Mr Eyre，who mentioned that his niece was going to marry a Mr Rochester．'
　　'Yes，I wrote to tell him I was getting married，'I said．
　　'Well，when Mr Mason explained that Mr Rochester was already married，your uncle sent him straight back to England to prevent you from marrying and making a terrible mistake． I'm afraid your uncle is very ill and will probably die soon，so I think you had better stay in England， until you receive further news of him．'
　　After the gentlemen had left，I entered my room and locked the door．Slowly I took off my wedding dress and veil．I was weak and exhausted，and only just beginning to realize what had happened．Could I ever again trust the being I had turned into a sort of god？I would not think of him as evil，but he could not have felt real love for me．How foolish I had been to believe him，and love him so much！My hopes were all dead，and my future was empty．I lay on my bed，faint and wishing for death．while darkness swam around me．






■ 18 Mr Rochester's explanation
　　Sometime in the afternoon I recovered a little，but I felt faint as I stood up，and realized I had not eaten anything all day．So I opened my bedroom door and almost fell over Mr Rochester，who was sitting in a chair just outside．
　　'I've been waiting for you all this time，Jane，'he said．'And I haven't heard you scream or shout or cry．Aren't you angry with me？I never meant to hurt you．Will you ever forgive me？'
　　He sounded so sincere that I forgave him at once in my heart．
　　'Scold me，Jane！Tell me how wicked I am！'he said．
　　'Sir，I can't．I feel tired and weak．I want some water．'
　　He took me in his arms and carried me downstairs to the library，where he put me in front of the fire，and gave me a glass of wine．I began to feel better．He bent to kiss me，but I turned my face determinedly away．
　　'What！'he cried．'You refuse to kiss me！Because I'm Bertha Mason's husband？Is that it？'
　　'Yes，sir．'
　　'I know you very well，Jane．I know how firm you are when you've decided something．You're planning to destroy my hope of happiness．You intend to be a stranger to me from now on．And if I'm friendly towards you in future，you'll remind yourself，“That man nearly made me his mistress—I must be ice-cold to him，”and ice-cold is what you'll be．'
　　'It's true，sir，'I said，trying to stop my voice from trembling，'that everything around me has changed，so I must change too．Adele must have a new governess．'
　　'Oh，Adele will go to boarding school．I've already decided that．And you and I will both leave this house，this narrow stone hell，this house of living death．We can never be happy here，under the same roof as that woman．Oh，I hate her！'
　　'You shouldn't hate her，sir，'I said．'It's not her fault she's mad，poor thing．'
　　'Jane，my darling，it's not because she's mad that I hate her．If you were mad，I wouldn't hate you．I'd look after you lovingly But why talk of madness？We are all ready to travel，everything is packed．Tomorrow we'll leave．I have a place to go to，where nobody will find us or talk about us—'
　　'And take Adele with you，sir，she'll be a companion for you，'I interrupted．I knew I had to tell him soon．
　　'Adele？What do you mean，Jane？She's going to school．I don't want her，I want you with me．Do you understand？'
　　I did，but I slowly shook my head．He was becoming angry，and was staring fiercely at me．He looked as if he was about to lose control．I was not at all afraid，because I knew I still had the power to calm him．So I took his hand and stroked it，saying，
　　'Sit down，sir，I'll talk or listen to you as long as you like．'I had been struggling with tears for some time and now I let them flow freely．It was a great relief．
　　'Don't cry，Jane，please be calm，'he begged．
　　'How can I be calm when you're so angry？'
　　'I'm not angry，but I love you so much，and your pale little face looked so stern and decided．'He tried to put his arm round me，but I would not let him．
　　'Jane！'he said sadly，'you don't love me，then？'
　　'I do love you，'I answered，'more than ever， but this is the last time I can say it．There is only one thing for me to do，but you'll be furious if I mention it ．'
　　'Oh， mention it！If I'm angry， you can always burst into tears，'he said， with a half-smile．
　　'Mr Rochester，I must leave you．I must start a new life among strangers．'
　　'Of course．I told you we would leave．I'll ignore that nonsense about you leaving me．You'll be Mrs Rochester and I'll be your husband until I die．We'll live happily and innocently together in a little white house I have in the south of France．Jane，don't shake your head，or I'll get angry．'
　　'Sir，your wife is alive，'I dared to say，although he was looking aggressively at me，'and if I lived with you like that，I'd be your mistress．'
　　'I'm a fool！'he said suddenly．'I haven't told you the whole story！Oh，I'm sure you'll agree when you know everything！Listen，Jane，you know that my father loved money very much？'
　　'I heard someone say that，yes，sir．'
　　'Well，he hated the idea of dividing the family property，so he left it all to my elder brother．But that meant I would be poor unless I married a rich wife，so he decided I should marry Bertna Mason，the daughter of his wealtny friend Jonas Mason．I was young and easily impressed，so when I saw her in the West Indies，beautiful and elegantly dressed，I thought I loved her．What a fool I was then！After the wedding I learned that my bride's mother and younger brother were both mad．Dick Mason will probably be in the same state one day．My father knew all this，but did not tell me．I soon found that Bertha and I had nothing in common．Not only was she coarse and stupid，her madness also made her violent．I lived with her for four years．By now my father and brother were dead，so I was rich，but I considered myself poor，because I was tied to a mad wife until death．'
　　'I pity you，sir，I do pity you．'
　　'Pity，Jane，is an insult from some people，but from you I accept it as the mother of love．Well，I had moments of despair when I intended to shoot myself，but in the end I decided to bring the mad woman back to Thornfield Hall，where nobody knew that we were married． She has lived here ever since． Even Mrs Fairfax and the servants don't know the whole truth about her． But although I pay Grace Poole well，and trust her absolutely，she sometimes drinks too much and allows the creature to escape．Twice she has got out of her room at night，as you know．The first time she nearly burnt me in my bed，and the second time she visited you， and must have been reminded of her own wedding day by seeing your wedding dress．'
　　'And what did you do，sir，when you had brought her here？'
　　'I travelled all over Europe，Jane．I was looking for a good and intelligent woman to love—'
　　'But you couldn't marry，sir，' I interrupted．
　　'I believed I could．I thought I might find some reasonable woman who would understand my case and accept me．'
　　'Well， sir， did you？'
　　'Not in Europe，Jane，where I spent ten long years looking for an ideal．I tried taking mistresses，like Celine，the French dancer．But finally，bitter and disappointed with my wasted life，I returned to Thornfield on a frosty winter afternoon．And when my horse slipped and fell on the ice，a little figure appeared and insisted on helping me．In the weeks that followed，I began to depend on that bird－like little figure for my happiness and new interest in life．'
　　'Don't talk any more of the past，sir，' I said，wiping a secret tear from my eyes．
　　'No，Jane，you're right，the future is much brighter．You understand now，don't you？I've wasted half my life in misery and loneliness，but now I've found you．You are at the centre of my heart．It was stupid of me to try to marry you like that without explaining．I should have confessed everything，as I do now，and appealed to your great generosity of spirit．I promise to love you and stay with you for ever．Jane，promise me the same．'
　　A pause．'Why are you silent，Jane？'
　　This was a terrible moment for me．In the struggle and confusion that was going on in my heart I knew that he loved me and I loved him，but I also knew that I must leave him！
　　'Jane，just promise me，“I will be yours．”'
　　'Mr Rochester，I will not be yours．'Another pause．
　　'Jane，'he said，with a gentleness that cut into my soul，'Jane，do you intend us to live apart for ever？'
　　'I do．' 'Jane，'（bending towards me and kissing me）'is that still your intention？'
　　'It is，'I replied，pulling away from him．
　　'Oh Jane，this is a bitter shock．It would not be wicked to love me．'
　　'It would be wicked to do what you want．'
　　'Jane，just imagine my horrible life when you have gone．I shall be alone with that mad woman upstairs．Where shall I find friendship，and hope？'
　　'You can only trust in God and yourself．Live without doing wrong，and die hoping to go to heaven．'
　　'That's impossible without you！And…and you have no family to offend by living with me！'He was beginning to sound desperate．I knew that what he said was true．However，in my heart I also knew I was right to leave．
　　He seemed to read my thoughts．Rushing furiously across the room，he seized me violently and stared fiercely into my eyes．He could have broken me in two with one hand，but he could not break my spirit．Small and weak as I was，I stared firmly back at him．
　　'Your eyes，Jane，'he said，'are the eyes of a bird， a free，wild being：Even if I break your cage，I can't reach you，beautiful creature！You'll fly away from me．But you could choose to fly to me！Come，Jane，come！'He let me go，and only looked at me．How hard it was to resist that look！
　　'I am going，'I said．
　　'Does my deep love mean nothing to you？Oh Jane，my hope…my love…my life！'And be threw himself despairingly on the sofa．I had reached the door，but I could not leave．I walked back，bent over him，and kissed his cheek．
　　'Goodbye，my dear master！'I said．'May God protect you！'
　　'Without your love，Jane，my heart is broken，'he said．'But perhaps you will，so generously，give me your love after all—'He jumped up with hope in his eyes，holding out his arms to me．But I turned and ran out of the room．
　　That night I only slept a little， dreaming of the red room at Gateshead．The moonlight shone into my bedroom，as it did then，and I saw a vision on the ceiling，a white figure looking down on me．It seemed to whisper to my spirit，'Daughter，leave now before you are tempted to stay．'
　　'Mother，I will，'I answered．And when I woke up，although it was still dark outside，I wrapped up some spare clothes in a parcel，and put a little money in a purse．As I crept downstairs，I could hear Mr Rochester in his room，walking up and down and sighing．I could find heaven in this room if I wanted．I just had to enter and say，'I will love you and live with you through life until death！'My hand moved towards the handle．But I stopped myself，and went miserably downstairs and out of the house．
　　Setting out on the road，I could not help thinking of Mr Rochester's despair when he found himself abandoned．I hated myself for wounding him，and for perhaps driving him to a life of wickedness，or even death．I wanted desperately to be with him，to comfort him，but somehow I made myself keep walking，and when a coach passed，I arranged to travel on it as far as my money would pay for．Inside the coach I cried the bitterest tears of my life．






■ Part Four - A Woman At Moor House



■ 19 Finding shelter
　　I was put down at Whitcross，a crossroads on the moor，after travelling for two days in the coach．As it rolled away，I realized I had left my parcel inside，and given the coachman all the coins in my purse．I was alone on the open moor，with no money or possessions．Lonely white roads stretched across the great，wide moors as far as the hills．I was glad to see there were no towns here，because I did not want people to question me or pity me．So I walked across the moor，until I found a dry place to sleep，in the shelter of a small hill．Luckily it was a warm night，with no rain．The next day was hot and sunny，but I needed food and water，so I could not stay on the moor．
　　Taking one of the white roads，I eventually found a small village．I needed all my courage to knock on some of the doors，asking if there was any paid work I could do．None of the village people could help me，and I could not bring myself to beg for food，although by now I felt weak and faint．At the baker's I offered to exchange my leather gloves for a small cake，but the baker's wife looked at my dirty clothes and said，'I'm sorry，but how do I know you haven't stolen them？'All I ate that day was a piece of bread，which I begged from a farmer eating his supper．I spent another night on the moor，but this time the air was cold and the ground was damp．Next day I walked from house to house again，looking in vain for work．I was now very weak from lack of food，and I began to wonder why I should struggle to stay alive，when I did not want to live．
　　It was getting dark again，and I was alone on the moor．In the distance I could see a faint light，and I decided to try to reach it．The wind and rain beat down on me，and I fell down several times，but finally I arrived at a long，low house，standing rather isolated in the middle of the moor．Hiding near the door，I could just see into the kitchen through a small uncurtained window．There was an elderly woman，who might be the housekeeper，mending clothes，and two young ladies，who seemed to be learning a language with dictionaries．The kitchen looked so clean and bright，and the ladies so kind and sensible，that I dared to knock at the door．The elderly woman opened it，but she must have thought I was a thief or a beggar，because she refused to let me speak to the young ladies．The door closed firmly，shutting me out from the warmth inside．
　　I dropped on to the wet doorstep，worn out and hopeless，prepared to die．There the young ladies'brother found me，when he returned home a few minutes later，and he insisted，much against the housekeeper's wishes，on bringing me into the house．They gave me bread and milk，and asked my
　　'Jane Elliott，'I replied．I did not want anybody to know where I had come from．To their further questions I answered that I was too tired to speak．Finally they helped me upstairs to a bedroom，and I sank gratefully into a warm，dry bed．
　　For three days and nights I lay in bed，exhausted by my experiences，and hardly conscious of my surroundings．As I was recovering，Hannah，the housekeeper，came to sit with me，and told me all about the family．She had known them since they were babies．Their mother had been dead for years，and their father had died only three weeks before．The girls，Diana and Mary Rivers，had to work as governesses，as their father had lost a lot of money in business．St John，their brother，was the vicar in the nearest village，Morton．They only used this house，called Moor House，in the holidays．
　　When I felt strong enough to get dressed and go downstairs，Diana and Mary looked after me very kindly，and made me feel welcome in their pleasant home．Their brother，however，seemed stern and cold．He was between twenty-eight and thirty，fair-haired and extremely handsome．Diana and Mary were curious about my past，but sensitive enough to avoid asking questions which would hurt me．St John，on the other hand，made determined efforts to discover who I was，but I，just as firmly，refused to explain more than necessary．I told them only that，after attending Lowood school，I became a governess in a wealthy family，where an unfortunate event，not in any way my fault，caused me to run away．That was all I was prepared to say．I offered to do any kind of work，teaching，sewing，cleaning，so that I could become independent again．St John approved of my keenness to work，and promised to find me some paid employment．









■ 20 A new home
　　I spent a month at Moor House，in an atmosphere of warm friendship．I learned to love what Diana and Mary loved the little old grey house，the wild open moors around it，and the lonely hills and valleys where we walked for hours．I read the books they read，and we discussed them eagerly Diana started teaching me German，and I helped Mary to improve her drawing．We three shared the same interests and opinions，and spent the days and evenings very happily together．
　　However，St John hardly ever joined in our activities．He was often away from home，visiting the poor and the sick in Morton．His strong sense of duty made him insist on going，even if the weather was very bad．But despite his hard work I thought he lacked true happiness and peace of mind．He often stopped reading or writing to stare into the distance，dreaming perhaps of some ambitious plan．Once I heard him speak at a church service in Morton，and although he was an excellent speaker，there was a certain bitterness and disappointment in his words．He was clearly not satisfied with his present life．
　　The holiday was coming to an end．Soon Diana and Mary would leave Moor House to return to the wealthy families in the south，where they were both governesses，and St John would go back to the vicar's house in Morton，with Hannah，his housekeeper．Although，his cold manner made it difficult for me to talk to him，I had to ask him whether he had found any employment for me．
　　'I have，'he answered slowly，'but remember I am only a poor country vicar，and can't offer you a job with a high salary，so you may not wish to accept it．There's already a school for boys in Morton，and now I want to open one for girls，so I've rented a building for it it，with a small small cottage for the schoolteacher．Miss Oliver，who lives in the area and is the only daughter of a rich factory-owner，has kindly paid for the furniture．Will you be the schoolteacher？You would live in the cottage rent-free，and receive thirty pounds a year，no more．
　　I thought about it for a moment．It was not as good as being a governess in an important family，but at least I would have no master．I would be free and independent．
　　'Thank you，Mr Rivers，I accept gladly，'I replied．
　　'But you do understand？'he asked，a little worried．'It will only be a village school．The girls will be poor and uneducated．You'll be teaching reading，writing，counting，sewing，that's all．There'll be no music or languages or painting．'
　　'I understand，and I'll be happy to do it，'I answered．
　　He smiled，well satisfied with me．
　　'And I'll open the school tomorrow，if you like，'I added．
　　'Very good，'he agreed．Then looking at me，he said，'But 214
　　I don't think you'll stay long in the village．'
　　'Why not？I'm not ambitious，although I think you are．'
　　He looked surprised．'I know I am，but how did you discover that？No，I think you won't be satisfied by living alone．You need people to make you happy．'He said no more．
　　Diana and Mary lost their usual cheerfulness as the moment for leaving their home and their brother came closer．
　　'You see，Jane，'Diana explained，'St John is planning to become a missionary very soon．He feels his purpose in life is to spread the Christian religion in unexplored places where the people have never heard the word of God．So we won't see him for many years，perhaps never again！He looks quiet，Jane，but he's very determined．I know he's doing God's work，but it will break my heart to see him leave！'And she broke down in tears．
　　Mary wiped her own tears away，as she said，'We've lost our father．Soon we'll lose our brother too！'
　　Just then St John himself entered，reading a letter．'Our uncle John is dead，'he announced．The sisters did not look shocked or sad，but seemed to be waiting for more information．St John gave them the letter to read，and then they all looked at each other，smiling rather tiredly．
　　'Well，'said Diana，'at least we have enough money to live on．We don't really need any more．'
　　'Yes，'said St John，'but unfortunately we can imagine 216
　　how different our lives might have been．'He went out．There was a silence for a few minutes，then Diana turned to me，
　　'Jane，you must be surprised that we don't show any sadness at our uncle's death．I must explain．We've never met him．He was my mother's brother，and he and my father quarrelled years ago about a business deal．That's when my father lost most of his money．My uncle，on the other hand，made a fortune of twenty thousand pounds，As he never married and had no relations apart from us and one other person，my father always hoped we would inherit uncle John's money．But it seems this other relation has inherited his whole fortune．Of course we shouldn't have expected anything，but Mary and I would have felt rich with only a thousand pounds each，and St John would have been able to help more poor people！'She said no more，and none of us referred to the subject again that evening．
　　The next day the Rivers family returned to their separate places of work，and I moved to the cottage in Morton．






■ 21 Mr Rivers'sacrifice
　　I had twenty village girls to teach，some of them with such a strong country accent that I could hardly communicate with them．Only three could read，and none could write，so at the end of my first day I felt quite depressed at the thought of the hard work ahead of me．But I reminded myself that I was fortunate to have any sort of job，and that I would certainly get used to teaching these girls，who，although they were very poor，might be as good and as intelligent as children from the greatest families in England．
　　Ever since I ran away from Thornfield，Mr Rochester had remained in my thoughts，and now，as I stood at my cottage door that first evening，looking at the quiet fields，I allowed myself to imagine again the life I could have had with him in his little white house in the south of France．He would have loved me，oh yes，he would have loved me very much for a while．'He did love me，'I thought，'nobody will ever love me like that again．'But then I told myself that I would only have been his mistress，in a foreign country，and for a short time，until he grew tired of me．I should be much happier here as a schoolteacher，free and honest，in the healthy heart of England．But strangely enough，St John Rivers found me crying as he approached the cottage．Frowning at the sight of the tears on my cheeks，he asked me，
　　'Do you regret accepting this job，then？'
　　'Oh no，'I replied quickly，'I'm sure I'll get used to it soon．And I'm really very grateful to have a home，and work to do．After all，I had nothing a few weeks ago．'
　　'But you feel lonely，perhaps？'he asked，still puzzled．
　　'I haven't had time to feel lonely yet．'
　　'Well，I advise you to work hard，and hot to look back into your past．If something which we know is wrong tempts us，then we must make every effort to avoid it，by putting our energy to better use．A year ago I too was very miserable，because I was bored by the routine life of a country vicar，and I was tempted to change my profession．But suddenly there was light in my darkness，and God called me to be a missionary．No profession could be greater than that！Since that moment of truth，I have been perfectly happy，making my preparations for leaving England and going abroad in the service of God．Happy，that is，except for one little human weakness，which I have sworn to overcome．'
　　His eyes shone as he spoke of his great purpose in life，and I was listening，fascinated，so neither of us heard the light footsteps approaching the cottage along the grassy path．
　　'Good evening，Mr Rivers，'said a charming voice，as sweet as a bell．St John jumped as if hit between the shoulders，then turned slowly and stiffly to face the speaker．A vision in white，with a young，girlish figure，was standing beside him．When she threw back her veil，she revealed a face of perfect beauty．St John glanced quickly at her，but dared not look at her for long．He kept his eyes on the ground as he answered，'A lovely evening，but it's late for you to be out alone．'
　　'Oh，Father told me you'd opened the new girls'school，so I simply had to come to meet the new schoolteacher．That must be you，'she said to me，smiling．'Do you like Morton？And your pupils？And your cottage？'I realized this must be the rich Miss Oliver who had generously furnished my cottage．
　　'Yes，indeed Miss Oliver，''I'replied．'I'm sure 'I'll enjoy teaching here．And I like my cottage very much．'
　　'I'll come and help you teach sometimes．I get so bored at home！Mr Rivers， I've been away visiting friends，you know．I've had such fun！I was dancing with the officers until two o'clock this morning！They're all so charming！'
　　St John's face looked sterner than usual and his lip curled in disapproval，as he lifted his handsome head and looked straight into Miss Oliver's laughing eyes．He breathed deeply and his chest rose，as if his heart wanted to fly out of its cage，but he said nothing，and after a pause Miss Oliver continued，'Do come and visit my father，Mr Rivers．Why don't you ever come？'
　　'I can't come，Miss Rosamund．'It seemed clear to me that St John had to struggle with himself to refuse this smiling invitation．
　　'Well，if you don't want to，I must go home then．
　　Goodbye！'She held out her hand．He just touched it，his hand trembling．
　　'Goodbye！'he said in a low，hollow voice，his face as white as a sheet．They walked away in different directions．She turned back twice to look at him，but he did not turn round at all．
　　The sight of another person's suffering and sacrifice stopped me thinking so much about my own problems．I had plenty of opportunities to observe St John and Miss Oliver together．Every day St John taught one Bible lesson at the school，and Miss Oliver，who knew her power over him，always chose that particular moment to arrive at the school door，in her most attractive riding dress．She used to walk past the rows of admiring pupils towards the young vicar，smiling openly at him．He just stared at her，as if he wanted to say，' I love you，and I know you love me．If I offered you my heart，I think you'd accept．But my heart is already promised as a sacrifice to God．'But he never said anything，and she always turned sadly away like a disappointed child．No doubt he would have given the world to call her back，but he would not give his chance of heaven．
　　When I discovered that Miss Oliver's father greatly admired the Rivers family，and would have no objection to her marrying a vicar，I decided to try to persuade St John to marry her．I thought he could do more good with Miss Oliver's money in England than as a missionary under the baking sun in the East．
　　My chance came some weeks later，when he visited me one November evening in my little cottage．He noticed a sketch I had been doing of Miss Oliver，and could not take his eyes off it．
　　'I could paint you an exact copy，'I said gently，'if you admit that you would like it．'
　　'She's so beautiful！'he murmured，still looking at it．'I would certainly like to have it．'
　　'She likes you，I'm sure，'I said，greatly daring，'and her father respects you．You ought to marry her．'
　　'It's very pleasant to hear this，'he said，not at all shocked by my honesty．'I shall allow myself fifteen minutes to think about her．'And he actually put his watch on the table，and sat back in his chair，closing his eyes．'Married to the lovely Rosamund Oliver！Let me just imagine it！My heart is full of delight！'And there was silence for a quarter of an hour until he picked up his watch，and put the sketch back on the table．
　　'Temptation has a bitter taste，'he said，shaking his head．'I can't marry her．You see，although I love her so deeply，I know that Rosamund would not make a good wife for a missionary．
　　'But you needn't be a missionary！'I cried．
　　'Indeed I must！It's the great work God has chosen me to do！I shall carry with me into the darkest corners of the world knowledge，peace，freedom，religion，the hope of heaven！That is what I live for，and what I shall die for！'
　　'What about Miss Oliver？'I asked after a moment．'She may be very disappointed if you don't marry her．'
　　'Miss Oliver will forget me in a month，and will probably marry someone who'll make her far happier than I ever could！'
　　'You speak calmly，but I know you're suffering．'
　　'You are original，'he said，looking surprised．He had clearly not imagined that men and women could discuss such deep feelings together．'But believe me，I have overcome this weakness of mine，and become as hard as a rock．My only ambition now is to serve God．'As he picked up his hat before leaving，something on a piece of paper on the table caught his eye．He glanced at me，then tore off a tiny piece very quickly，and with a rapid'Goodbye！'rushed out of the cottage．I could not imagine what he had found to interest him so much．






■ 22 Sudden wealth
　　When St John left，it was beginning to snow，and it continued snowing all night and all the next day．In the evening I sat by my fire，listening to the wind blowing outside，and had just started reading when I heard a noise．The wind，I thought，was shaking the door，but no，it was St John，who came in out of the frozen darkness，his coat covered in snow．
　　'what's happened？'I cried，amazed．'I thought nobody would be out in weather like this！What's the matter？'
　　'There's nothing wrong，'he answered calmly，hanging up his coat，and stamping the snow from his boots．'I just came to have a little talk to you．Besides，since yesterday I've been eager to hear the other half of your story．'He sat down．I had no idea what he was referring to，and remembering his strange behaviour with the piece of paper，I began to fear that he might be going mad．He looked quite normal，however，and we made conversation for a while，although he seemed to be thinking of something else．
　　Suddenly he said，'When I arrived I said I wanted to hear the rest of your story．But perhaps it's better if I tell the story．I'm afraid you've heard it before，but listen anyway．Twenty years ago a poor vicar fell in love with a rich man's daughter．She also fell in love with him，and married him，against the advice of all her family．Sadly，less than two years later the couple were both dead．I've seen their grave．Their baby daughter was brought up by an aunt，a Mrs Reed of Gateshead．You jumped— did you hear a noise？ I'll continue．I don't know whether the child was happy with Mrs Reed，but she stayed there ten years，until she went to Lowood school，where you were yourself．In fact，it seems her life was quite similar to yours．She became a teacher at Lowood，as you did，and then became a governess in the house of a certain Mr Rochester．'
　　'Mr Rivers！'I interrupted，unable to keep silent．
　　'I can imagine how you feel，'he replied，'but wait till I've finished．I don't know anything about Mr Rochester's character，but I do know that he offered to marry this young girl，who only discovered during the wedding ceremony that he was in fact already married，to a mad woman．The governess disappeared soon after this，and although investigations have been carried out，and advertisements placed in newspapers，and every effort made to find her，nobody knows where she's gone．But she must be found！Mr Briggs，a lawyer，has something very important to tell her．'
　　'Just tell me one thing，'I said urgently．'What about Mr Rochester？How and where is he？What's he doing？Is he well？'
　　'I know nothing about Mr Rochester．Why don't you ask the name of the governess，and why everybody is looking for her？'
　　'Did Mr Briggs write to Mr Rochester？'I asked．
　　'He did，but he received an answer not from him，but from the housekeeper，a Mrs Fairfax．'
　　I felt cold and unhappy．No doubt Mr Rochester had left England for a life of wild pleasure in the cities of Europe．That was what I had been afraid of．Oh，my poor master—once almost my husband—who I had often called' my dear Edward'！
　　'As you won't ask the governess's name，I'll tell you myself，'continued St John．'I've got it written down．It's always better to have facts in black and white．'And he took out of his wallet a tiny piece of paper，which I recognized as part of my sketch book，and showed it to me．On it I read，in my own writing，'JANE EYRE'，which I must have written without thinking．
　　'The advertisements and Briggs spoke of a Jane Eyre，but I only knew a Jane Elliott，'said St John．'Are you Jane Eyre？'
　　'Yes—yes，but doesn't Mr Briggs know anything about Mr Rochester？'I asked desperately．
　　'I don't think Briggs is at all interested in Mr Rochester．You're forgetting the really important thing．Don't you want to know why he's been looking for you？'
　　'Well，what did he want？'I asked，almost rudely．
　　'Only to tell you that your uncle，Mr Eyre of Madeira，is dead，that he has left you all his property，and that you're now rich—only that，nothing more．'
　　Rich！One moment I was poor，the next moment I was wealthy．It was hard to realize my new situation．A fortune brings serious worries and responsibilities with it，which I could hardly imagine．I was sorry to hear that my uncle，my only surviving relation，was dead．However，the inheritance would give me independence for life，and I was glad of that．
　　'Perhaps you would like to know how much you've inherited？'offered St John politely．'It's nothing much really，just twenty thousand pounds，I think．'
　　'Twenty thousand pounds？'The news took my breath away．St John，who I had never heard laugh before，actually laughed out loud at my shocked face．'Perhaps…perhaps you've made a mistake？'I asked him nervously．
　　'No，there's no mistake．Now I must be leaving．Good night．'He was about to open the door，when suddenly I called，' Stop！Why did Mr Briggs write to you in order to find me？'
　　'Oh，I'm a vicar．I have ways of discovering things．'
　　'No，that doesn't satisfy me．Tell me the truth，'I insisted，putting myself between him and the door．
　　'Well，I'd rather not tell you just now，but I suppose you'll discover it sooner or later．Did you know that my full name is St John Eyre Rivers？'
　　'No，I didn't！But then what—'And I stopped as light flooded my mind and I saw clearly the chain of circumstances which connected us．But St John continued his explanation．
　　'My mother's name was Eyre，'he said．'She had two brothers，one，a vicar，who married Miss Jane Reed of Gateshead，and the other，John Eyre of Madeira．Mr Briggs，Mr Eyre's lawyer，wrote to us telling us that our uncle had died，and left all his property，not to us，because of his quarrel with our father，but to his brother's daughter．Then Mr Briggs wrote again later，saying this girl could not be found．Well，I've found her．'He moved towards the door，his hat in his hand．
　　'Wait a moment，just let me think，'I said．'So you，Diana and Mary are my cousins？'
　　'We are your cousins，yes，'he said，waiting patiently．
　　As I looked at him，it seemed I had found a brother and sisters to love and be proud of for the rest of my life．The people who had saved my life were my close relations！This was wealth indeed to a lonely heart，brighter and more life-giving than the heavy responsibility of coins and gold．
　　'Oh，I'm glad—I'm so glad！'I cried，laughing．
　　St John smiled．'You were serious when I told you you had inherited a fortune．Now you're excited about something very unimportant．'
　　'What can you mean？It may mean nothing to you．You already have sisters and don't need any more family．But I had nobody，and now I suddenly have three relations in my world，or two，if you don't want to be counted．'I walked rapidly round the room，my thoughts rising so fast I could hardly understand them．The family I now had， the people who had saved me from starvation，I could now help them！There were the four of us cousins．Twenty thousand pounds，shared equally，would be five thousand pounds each，more than enough for each one of us．It would be a fair and just arrangement，and we would all be happy．I would no longer have the worry of controlling a large amount of money，and they would never have to work again．We would all be able to spend more time together at Moor House．
　　Naturally，when I made this suggestion to St John and his sisters，they protested strongly，and it was with great difficulty that I finally managed to convince them of my firm intention to carry out this plan．In the end they agreed that it was a fair way of sharing the inheritance，and so the legal steps were taken to transfer equal shares to all of us．






■ 23 A voice from the past
　　I promised to stay at Morton school until Christmas，when St John would be able to find another teacher．He was there when I closed the school for the Christmas holidays．I was quite sorry to have to say goodbye to some of my pupils．
　　'You see what progress they have made！And you've only worked here a few months！'he said．'Imagine how much more good you coul do if you gave your whole life to teaching！'
　　'Yes，'I answered，'but I couldn't do it for ever．Don't mention school，I'm on holiday now！'
　　He looked serious．'What are your plans？'
　　'I want you to let me have Hannah for a few days．She and I are going to clean Moor House from top to bottom，and make all the Christmas preparations that you know nothing about，being only a man．Everything must be ready for Diana and Mary when they come home next week，for a really wonderful holiday．'
　　St John smiled but he was still not satisfied with me．'That's all right for the moment，but I hope，Jane，that you'll look higher than domestic activity，and think abut a better way of using your energy and intelligence in the service of God．'
　　'St John，I have so many reasons for happiness．I am determined to be happy despite your scolding！'
　　That week Hannah and I worked harder than we had ever worked in our lives before，but at last all was ready．It was a delight to see Diana's and Mary's faces when they arrived cold and stiff from their long journey，and saw the warm fires and polished furniture，and smelt the cakes and meat dishes cooking．
　　We three spent the whole of Christmas week in perfect happiness．The air of the moors，the freedom of home，and the beginning of independence made Diana and Mary happier than I had ever seen them．Only St John remained apart from our conversations and laughter．He continued his serious studies，and spent much time visiting the sick as usual．
　　'Do you still intend to be a missionary？'Diana asked him once，a little sadly．
　　'Nothing has changed or will change my plans，'he answered．'I shall leave England in a few months'time．'
　　'And Rosamund Oliver？'asked Mary gently．
　　'Rosamund Oliver is engaged to a Mr Granby，a very suitable young man，according to her father．'His face was calm．I realized he had managed to overcome what he called his weakness．
　　Gradually our life at Moor House lost its holiday feeling，and as we took up our usual habits and regular studies again，St John sat with us more often．Sometimes I had the impression he was observing us．One day，when Diana and Mary were out and I was learning German，he suddenly said to me，'I want you to learn Hindustani instead of German．I'll need it for my missionary work in India，and you could help me to learn it by studying with me．I've chosen you because I've noticed you have better powers of concentration than either of my sisters．'It seemed so important to him that I could not refuse，and when his sisters returned，they were surprised to find me learning Hindustani with St John．
　　From now on we spent a lot of time together，studying．I had to work very hard to satisfy him．Under his influence，however，I felt I was losing my freedom to be myself．I could no longer talk or laugh freely，as I knew he only approved of serious moods and studies．I fell under his freezing spell，obeying all his commands without thinking．
　　One evening，at bedtime，as he kissed his sisters good night，and was holding out his hand to shake mine，as usual，Diana said，laughing，'St John！You aren't treating Jane like one of the family！You should kiss her too．'I was rather embarrassed，but St John calmly kissed me，and did so every evening after that．
　　I had not forgotten Mr Rochester in all these changes of home and fortune．His name was written on my heart，and would stay there as long as I lived．Not only had I written to ask Mr Briggs more about him，I had also written twice to Mrs Fairfax．But after I had waited in vain for six months，I lost hope，and felt low indeed．Diana said I looked ill，and needed a holiday at the seaside，but St John thought I ought to concentrate on more serious work，and gave me even more Hindustani exercises to do．
　　One day，while he and I were walking on the moors，he announced，'Jane，I'll be leaving in six weeks．'
　　'You're doing God's work．He'll protect you，'I replied．
　　'Yes，it seems strange to me that all my friends don't want to join me．God offers a place in heaven to all who serve Him．What does your heart say to that，Jane？'
　　'My heart is silent—my heart is silent，'I murmured．
　　'Then I must speak for it，'said the deep，stern voice．'Jane，come with me to India as a missionary！'
　　Was it a call from God？I felt as if I was under a terrible spell，and I trembled，afraid that I might not be able to escape．
　　'Oh St John，don't choose me！'I begged．But it was useless appealing to a man who always did what he believed to be his duty，however unpleasant it was．
　　'God intended you to be a missionary's wife，'he continued．'Trust in Him，Jane．Marry me，for the service of God．'
　　'I can't do it，St John，I'm not strong enough！'I cried．The iron bars of a cage seemed to be closing in around me．
　　'I've seen how hard you can work，Jane．You will be a great help to me with Indian women，and in Indian schools．'
　　I thought，' Yes，I could do that．But I know that he doesn't love me， and despite that， he asks me to marry him！'So I said，
　　'I'm ready to go with you to India，but as a sister， not as a wife．'
　　He shook his head．'You must see that's impossible． No， a sister could marry at any time， and leave me．I need a wife，who will obey me in life， and who will stay with me until death．'
　　I trembled as I felt his power over me already．'I'll give my heart to Good，'I said．'You don't want it．'As I looked at his stern face， I knew I could go anywhere in the world with him as a colleague， but I could never lose my freedom by marrying him．
　　'I'll ask you again in a few days'time， he said，'and remember， it isn't me you're refusing， but God！'
　　From then on his manner towards me was as cold as ice，which caused me great pain．I began to understand how，if I were his wife， this good， religious man could soon kill me，without feeling any guilt at all．
　　When he asked me again， we were alone in the sitting－room． He put his hand on my head and spoke quietly in his deep， sincere voice．'Remember， Jane， God calls us to work for Him，and will reward us for it．Say you will marry me，and earn your place in heaven！'I admired and respected him，and under his touch my mind was changing． I was tempted to stop struggling against him， as I had been tempted before，in a different way， by Mr Rochester．The missionary gently held my hand．I could resist his anger， but not his gentleness．I desperately wanted to do what was right．
　　'If I felt certain，'I answered finally，'that God really wanted me to marry you， I would agree！'
　　'My prayers are heard！'cried St John． Close together we stood， waiting for a sign from heaven． I was more excited than I had ever been before． There was a total silence in the house，and the room was full of moonlight．Suddenly my heart stopped beating， and I heard a distant voice cry，'Jane！ Jane！Jane！'—nothing more．Where did it come from？It was the voice of Edward Rochester， and it spoke in sadness and in pain．
　　'I'm coming！'I cried．'Wait for me！'I ran into the garden calling，'Where are you？'Only the hills sent a faint echo back．
　　I broke away from St John， who had followed， asking me questions．It was my time to give orders now． I told him to leave me， and he obeyed．In my room I fell to my knees to thank God for the sign He had sent me， and waited eagerly for daylight．






■ Part Five - A Wife At Ferndean Manor



■ 24 Returning to Thornfield
　　In the morning I explained to Diana and Mary that I had to go on a journey， and would be away for several days． Although they did not know the reason for my journey，they were far too sensitive to my feelings to bother me with questions．
　　And so I walked to Whitcross，the lonely crossroads on the moor，where I had arrived a year ago with no money or luggage．I took the coach， and after thirty－six hours of travelling I got down at Thornfield village， and almost ran across the fields in my hurry to see the well－known house again，and its owner．I decided to approach from the front， to get the best view of the house． From there I would be able to see my master's window．'He might even be walking in the gardens，'I thought，'and I could run to him，touch him！Surely that wouldn't hurt anybody？'
　　But when I reached the great stone columns of the main gate，I stood still in horror． There， where I had hoped to see a fine， impressive house， was nothing but a blackened heap of stones，with the silence of death about it．No wonder that letters addressed to people here had never received an answer．There must have been a great fire．How had it started？Had any lives been lost？ I ran back to the village to find answers to my questions．
　　'Well，ma'am，'the hotel－owner told me，'I was one of Mr Rochester's servants at the time， and I can tell you it was his mad wife who started the fire in the governess's room． The master had been wildly in love with the governess， you see，ma'am， although she was just a plain little thing， and when she disappeared， he almost went mad． His wife must have understood enough to be jealous of the girl．Anyway，in the fire the master risked his life helping all the servants out of the house， then bravely went back to save the mad woman． We saw her jump from the roof and fall to her death． But because he went back to help her，he was badly injured in the fire，losing a hand and the sight of both eyes．Very sad， ma'am．'
　　'Where is he now？'I asked urgently．
　　'At another house of his， Ferndean Manor， thirty miles away．
　　I hired a carriage to drive there at once．









■ 25 Finding Mr Rochester again
　　Ferndean Manor was a large old house in the middle of a wood． It looked dark and lonely， surrounded by trees．As I approached，the narrow front door opened，and out came a figure I could not fail to recognize， Edward Rochester． I held my breath as I watched，feeling a mixture of happiness and sadness． He looked as strong as before and his hair was still black， but in his face I saw a bitter， desperate look，that I had never seen there before．He walked slowly and hesitatingly along the path．Although he kept looking up eagerly at the sky，it was obvious that he could see nothing．After a while he stopped， and stood quietly there， the rain falling fast on his bent， uncovered head．Finally he found his way painfully back to the house， and closed the door．
　　When I knocked at the door， Mr Rochester's old servant，John，opened it and recognized me． He and his wife Mary were the only servants their master had wanted to keep when he moved from Thornfield． Although they were surprised to see me，I had no difficulty in arranging to stay at Ferndean that night．
　　'But he may not want to see you，'warned Mary， as we sat together in the kitchen．'He refuses to see anybody except us．'She was lighting some candles．'He always wants candles in the sitting－room when it's dark， even though he's blind．'
　　'Give them to me，Mary，'I said．'I'll take them to him．'
　　The blind man was sitting near the neglected fire in the dark room．'Put down the candles， Mary，'he sighed．
　　'Here they are， sir，'I said．
　　'That is Mary， isn't it？'he asked， listening carefully．
　　'Mary's in the kitchen，'I answered．
　　'What sweet madness has seized me？'he cried suddenly．
　　'Where is the speaker？I can't see， but I must feel，or my heart will stop， and my brain will burst！Let me touch you，or I can't live！I held his wandering band with both of mine．'Is it Jane？This is her shape…' He released his hand and seized my arm，shouldter，neck， waist and held me close to him．
　　'She is here，'I said，'and her heart too．I am Jane Eyre．I've found you and come back to you．'
　　'My living darling！So you aren't lying dead in a ditch somewhere！Is it a dream？I've dreamed so often of you，only to wake in the morning， abandoned， my life dark，my soul thirsty．'
　　'I'm alive， and I'm not a dream，In fact，I'm an independent woman now I've inherited five thousand pounds from my uncle．'
　　'Ah， that sounds real！I couldn't dream that．But perhaps you have friends now， and don't want to spend much time in a lonely house with a blind man like me．'
　　'I can do what I like，and I intend to stay with you，unless you object．I'll be your neighbour， your nurse， your housekeeper， your companion． You will never be sad or lonely as long as I live．'
　　He did not reply immediately， and I was a little embarrassed by his silence．I had assumed he would still want me to be his wife， and wondered why he did not ask me．
　　'Jane， he said sadly，'you cannot always be my nurse．It's kind and generous of you， but you're young， and one day you will want to marry．If I could only see，I'd try to make you love me again， but…'And he sighed deeply．
　　I was very relieved to discover that was all he was worrying about，because I knew that his blindness made no difference at all to my love for him． However， I thought too much excitement was not good for him， so I talked of other things，and made him laugh a little．As we separated at bedtime，he asked me，'Just one thing， Jane． Were there only ladies in the house where you've been？'I laughed， and escaped upstairs，still laughing．'A good idea！'I thought．'A little jealousy will stop him feeling so sorry for himself！'
　　Next day I took him outside for a long walk in the fresh air．I described the beauty of the fields and sky to him， as we sat close together in the shade of a tree．
　　'Tell me， Jane， what happened to you when you so cruelly abandoned me？'he asked， holding me tightly in his arms．
　　And so I told him my story． Naturally he was interested in St John Rivers，my cousin．
　　'This St John，do you like him？'
　　'He's a very good man．I couldn't help liking him．'
　　'He's perhaps a man of fifty or so？'
　　'St John is only twenty－nine，sir．'
　　'Rather stupid，I think you said？Not at all intelligent？'
　　'He has an excellent brain，sir．'
　　'Did you say he was rather plain， ugly，in fact？'
　　'St John is a handsome man，tall and fair， with blue eyes．'
　　Mr Rochester frowned， and swore loudly．
　　'In fact， sir，'I continued，'he asked me to marry him．'
　　'Well，Jane， leave me and go．Oh，until now I with thought you would never love another man！ But go and marry Rivers！'
　　'I can never marry him，sir He doesn't love me， and I don't love him． He's good and great， but as cold as ice． You needn't be jealous， sir All my heart is yours．'
　　He kisseed me．'I'm no better than the great tree hit by lightning at Thornfierld，'he said．'I can't expect to have a fresh young plant like you by my side，all my life．'
　　'You are still strong， sir， and young plants need the strength and safety of a tree to support them．' 'Jane， will you marry me， a poor blind man with one hand，twenty years older than you？'
　　'Yes， sir．'
　　'My darling！We'll be married in three days'time，Jane．Thank God！You know I never thought much of religion？Well，lately I've begun to understand that God has been punishing me for my pride and my past wickedness．Last Monday night，in a mood of deep depression，I was sitting by an open window， praying for a little peace and happiness in my dark life．In my heart and soul I wanted you．I cried out “Jane！”three times．'
　　'Last Monday night，about midnight？'I asked，wondering．
　　'Yes， but that doesn't matter．This is what's really strange．I heard a voice calling “I'm coming，wait for me！”and“Where are you？”And then I heard an echo sent back by hills， but there's no echo here，in the middle of the wood．Jane， you must have been asleep． Your spirit and mine must have met to comfort each other！ It was your voice I heard！'
　　I did not tell him I had actually spoken those words many miles away，at that exact moment on that night， because I could hardly understand how it happened myself．
　　'I thank God！'said Edward Rochester，'and ask Him to help me live a better life in future！'Together we returned slowly to Ferndean Manor， Edward leaning on my shoulder．
　　We had a quiet wedding．I wrote to tell the Rivers the news．Diana and Mary wrote back with delighted congratulations，but St John did not reply．
　　Now I have been married for ten years．I know what it is like to love and be loved， No woman has ever been closer to her husband than I am to Edward．I am my husband's life，and he is mine． We are always together，and have never had enough of each other's company． After two years his sight began to return in one eye．Now he can see a little， and when our first child was born and put into his arms， he was able to see that the boy had inherited his fine large black eyes．
　　Mrs Fairfax is retired，and Adele has grown into a charming young woman．Diana and Mary are both married，and we visit them once， a year．St John achieved his ambition by going to India as planned，and is still there．He writes to me regularly．He is unmarried and will never marry now．He knows that the end of his life is near， but he has no fear of death，and looks forward to gaining his place in heaven．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Oliver Twist by Charles Dickens





■ 1 O liver's early life
　　O liver Twist was born in a workhouse，and when he arrived in this hard world，it was very doubtful whether he would live beyond the first three minutes．He lay on a hard little bed and struggled to start breathing．
　　O liver fought his first battle without much assistance from the two people present at his birth．One was an old woman，who was nearly always drunk， and the other was a busy local doctor，who was not paid enough to be very interested in O liver's survival． After all，death was a common event in the workhouse，where only the poor and homeless lived．
　　However，O liver managed to draw his first breath，and the n announced his arrival to the rest of the workhouse by crying loudly．His mother raised her pale young face from the pillow and whispered， 'Let me see the child， and die．'
　　The doctor turned away from the fire， where he had been warming his hands． 'You must not talk about dying yet，'he said to her kindly．He gave her the child to hold．Lovingly，she kissed the baby on its forehead with her cold white lips，the n stared wildly around the room，fell back-and died. 'Poor dear！'said the nurse，hurriedly putting a green glass bottle back in the pocket of her long skirt.
　　The doctor began to put on his coat． 'The baby is weak and will probably have difficulties，' he said． 'If so， give it a little milk to keep it quiet．'The n he looked at the dead woman. 'The mother was a good－looking girl．Where did she come from？'
　　'She was brought here last night，'replied the old woman. 'She was found lying in the street. She'd walked some distance，judging by her shoes，which were worn to pieces．Where she came from，where she was going to，or what her name was，nobody knows.'
　　The doctor lifted the girl's left hand. 'The old story，'he said sadly，shaking his head． 'No wedding ring， I see．Ah！Good night.'
　　And so O liver was left with only the drunken nurse．Without clothe s，under his first blanket， he could have been the child of a king or a beggar．But when the woman dressed him later in rough cotton clothe s， yellow with age，he looked exactly what he was - an orphan in a workhouse， ready for a life of misery，hunger， and neglect.
　　O liver cried loudly．If he could have known that he was a workhouse orphan， perhaps he would have cried even more loudly.
　　The re was no one to look after the baby in the workhouse，so O liver was sent to a special 'baby farm' nearby. The re，he and thirty other children rolled around the floor all day，without the inconvenience of too much food or too much clothing. Mrs Mann，the old woman who 'looked after' them， was very experienced．She knew what was good for children，and a full stomach was very dangerous to their health. She also knew what was good for herself， so she kept for her own use the money that she was given for the children's food．The board responsible for the orphans sometimes checked on the health of the children， but They always sent the beadle，a kind of local policeman，to announce their visit the day before．So whenever the board arrived， of course，the children were always neat and clean．
　　This was the way O liver was brought up. Consequently， at the age of nine he was a pale，thin child and short for his age．But despite frequent beatings by Mrs Mann， his spirit was strong， which was probably the reason why he managed to reach the age of nine at all．
　　On O liver's ninth birthday， Mr Bumble the beadle came to the house to see Mrs Mann．Through the front window Mrs Mann saw him at the gate， and turned quickly to the girl who worked with her．
　　'Quick！Take O liver and those others upstairs to be washed！'she said．The n she ran out to unlock the gate．（It was always kept locked to prevent official visitors walking in unexpectedly．）
　　'I have business to talk about，'Mr Bumble told Mrs Mann as he entered the house．He was a big fat man， often bad-tempered， and was full of self-importance. He did not like to be kept waiting at a locked gate.
　　Mrs Mann took his hat and coat， placed a chair for him，and expressed great concern for his comfort． 'You've had a long walk，Mr Bumble' she said， 'and you must be thirsty．'She took out a bottle from the cupboard．
　　'No， thank you， Mrs Mann. Not a drop．'He waved the bottle away．
　　'Just a little drop， Mr Bumble， with cold water，' said Mrs Mann persuasively．
　　Mr Bumble coughed． 'What is it？' he asked， looking at the bottle with interest．
　　'Gin．I keep it for the children's medicine drink.'
　　'You give the children gin，Mrs Mann？'asked Mr Bumble，watching as she mixed his drink．
　　'Only with medicine， sir． I don't like to see the m suffer．'
　　'You're a good woman， Mrs Mann．' Mr Bumble drank half his glass immediately． 'I'll tell the board about you．Now - the reason why I'm here． O liver Twist is nine years old today． We've never been able to discover anything about his parents.'
　　'The n how did he get his name？'
　　'I gave it to him，'said Mr Bumble proudly． 'We follow the alphabet．The last one was an S-Swubble． The n it was T， so this one is Twist． The next one will be Unwin．Anyway，Oliver Twist is now old enough to return to the workhouse． Bring him here， please．' While Mrs Mann went to get him， Mr Bumble finished the rest of his gin．
　　Oliver， his face and hands now almost clean， was led into the room.
　　'Will you come along with me，Oliver？'asked Mr Bumble in a loud voice．
　　Oliver was very glad to be free of Mrs Mann's violence， but he said nothing because she was angrily shaking her finger at him．However，as the gate closed behind O liver，he burst into tears. He was leaving behind the other children， the only friends he had，and he realized at that moment how lonely he was in the world.
　　Mr Bumble walked on with long steps，with O liver on his short little legs running beside him．The feeling of contentment produced by gin－and－water had now disappeared，and the beadle was in a bad mood once more．
　　Back at the workhouse， O liver was taken to see the board. He stood in front of ten fat men who were sitting around a table．
　　'What's your name， boy？' asked a particularly fat man with a very round， red face．
　　O liver was frightened at the sight of so many people， and started to cry.
　　'Why are you crying？'
　　The beadle hit him on the back，and so naturally O liver cried even more.
　　'The boy is a fool，'one member of the board announced.
　　'You know you have no father or mother，'said the first man， 'and that you have been brought up with other orphans？'
　　'Yes， sir，'replied O liver， crying bitterly．
　　'Why is the boy crying？'repeated the other man， puzzled．
　　'You have come here to be educated，'continued the fat man， 'so you will start working here tomorrow at six o'clock．'
　　O liver was led away to a large room， where，on a rough hard bed，he cried himself to sleep．
　　The room in the workhouse where the boys were fed was a large stone hall，and at one end the master and two women served the food．This consisted of a bowl of thin soup three times a day， with a piece of bread on Sundays．The boys ate everything and were always hungry．The bowls never needed washing．The boys polished the m with their spoons until They shone．After three months of this slow starvation，one of the boys told the others he was so hungry that one night he might eat the boy who slept next to him．He had a wild hungry eye，and the other boys believed him．After a long discussion，They decided that one of the m should ask for more food after supper that evening，and O liver was chosen．
　　The evening arrived；the soup was served，and the bowls were empty again in a few seconds．O liver went up to the master，with his bowl in his hand．He felt very frightened，but also desperate with hunger．
　　'Please，sir，I want some more．'
　　The master was a fat，healthy man， but he turned very pale. He looked at the little boy in front of him with amazement．Nobody else spoke．
　　'What？' he asked at last， in a faint voice．
　　'Please， sir，' replied O liver， 'I want some more.'
　　The master hit him with the serving spoon，the n seized O liver's arms and shouted for the beadle．The beadle came quickly，heard the dreadful news，and immediately ran to tell the board．
　　'He asked for more？' Mr Limbkins，the fattest board member， asked in horror． 'Bumble - is this really true？'
　　'That boy will be hanged！' said the man who earlier had called O liver a fool． 'You see if I'm not right．'
　　O liver was led away to be locked up，and a reward was offered to anybody who would take him away and use him for work.



■ 2 O liver's first job
　　O liver stayed a prisoner alone in the dark room for a week． He cried bitterly all day，and when the long night came，he spread his little hands over his eyes to shut out the darkness， and tried to sleep．He was given freezing water to wash with，and was beaten daily by Mr Bumble in front of all the other boys in the hall，as a warning to the m．
　　One day Mr Bumble met the local undertaker， Mr Sowerberry， outside the workhouse．
　　'Do you know anybody who wants to train a boy for work，Mr Sowerberry？'Mr Bumble pointed at the notice on the wall above him， which offered five pounds to anybody who would take O liver Twist for work．
　　Mr Sowerberry rubbed his chin and thought for a while． 'I pay enough for the poor with my taxes，' he said， 'so why shouldn't I be able to make use of the m in my work？ Yes， I'll take the boy myself．'
　　And so the board agreed to send O liver to work for the undertaker．The necessary papers were signed．O liver's small possessions were put into a brown paper parcel，and he was led to Mr Sowerberry's house by Mr Bumble．As They walked along，tears began to run down O liver's face．
　　'What is it this time？'asked Mr Bumble impatiently． 'Don't be so ungrateful．This gentleman is going to look after you.'
　　'It's just that I'm so lonely， sir！' said the child． 'Everybody hates me．Please don't be angry with me，sir！'
　　Even Mr Bumble felt a little pity. He coughed，told O liver to dry his eyes and be a good boy， and walked on with him in silence.
　　The undertaker had just finished work for the day when Mr Bumble entered his shop．
　　'Here，I've brought the boy，' said the beadle．
　　O liver bowed to the undertaker， who raised his candle to get a better view of the boy． 'Mrs Sowerberry，'he called， 'come and have a look．'
　　His wife， a short，thin woman with a disagreeable face，came out to see. 'He's very small，'she said immediately．
　　'He is，'agreed Mr Bumble， 'but he'll grow，Mrs Sowerberry.'
　　'Yes，'she said crossly， 'when he eats our food. Go on，get downstairs.' She pushed O liver downstairs into a damp，dark kitchen，and called to the girl working down the re. 'Here，Charlotte，give this boy some meat that the dog left-if he thinks it's good enough for him．'
　　O liver tore the meat to pieces with his teeth as if he were a wild animal. Mrs Sowerberry watched him in silent horror，already thinking about her future food bills，then took him upstairs to the shop．
　　'You'll sleep here， among the coffins，'she said.
　　O liver stared around the dark，airless shop at the coffins，some finished，some only half-made．He trembled at the thought of ghosts．His bed was a small hole in the floor，and looked very like a grave．
　　But it was not only the room that depressed O liver．He felt very lonely，with no friends and no one to care for him． As he lay on the bed，he found himself wishing that it really was his grave.
　　The next morning he was woken up by someone kicking at the shop door．
　　'Open the door，will you？'shouted a voice through the keyhole．
　　'Yes，sir.'
　　'I suppose you're the new boy，'said the voice through the keyhole． 'How old are you？'
　　'Ten， sir.'
　　'The n I'll hit you when I get in，'said the voice．
　　O liver was experienced enough to know that the promise was probably true． He opened the door with a shaking hand，the n looked up and down the street．All he could see was a large boy wearing the uniform of one of the charity schools，where the children of the very poor used to go．
　　'Did you want a coffin？'asked O liver，innocently．
　　The charity－boy looked at him fiercely． 'You'll be needing a coffin soon，Workhouse，if you make jokes like that！ I'm Mister Noah Claypole，and you're working under me．Now，hurry up and open the curtains！'As he said this， he kicked O liver and entered the shop．He was a big，clumsy boy of about fourteen， with a large head and very small eyes．Added to the se attractions were a red nose and dirty yellow trousers．
　　The boys went down to breakfast， which the girl Charlotte had made for the m. She gave an extra piece of meat to Noah，the n told O liver to hurry up as it was his job to look after the shop．
　　'Did you hear that，Workhouse？' shouted Noah．
　　'He heard， Noah，'said Charlotte. 'Leave him alone.'
　　'Why？'asked Noah. 'All his relations have already left him alone. His mother and father aren't going to interfere with him！'Charlotte and Noah both started laughing loudly．O liver sat alone in the corner，eating old bits of bread.
　　Noah was a charity－boy， but not a workhouse orphan； he at least knew who his parents were. But for a long time all the local shop－boys had insulted him because he wore the uniform of a charity-boy． Now fortune had brought him a creature in an even lower position in society than himself．Noah intended to repay to O liver every insult he had ever received，and to make the new boy's life a misery.
　　After a few weeks，Mr Sowerberry decided that he liked O liver's appearance enough to train him in the undertaking business．O liver's permanent expression of sadness was very suitable，the undertaker thought，for collecting dead bodies from houses and accompanying the coffins to funerals.
　　One day Mr Bumble came to tell the m about a woman who had died in an extremely poor part of the town， and Sowerberry and O liver went to collect the body．They went down dirty narrow streets where the houses on either side were tall and large，but very old．Some of the houses were almost falling down， and had to be supported by huge blocks of wood. The area was so poor that even the dead rats in the street looked as though They had died of hunger．
　　They found the right house，and climbed the dark stairs to a miserable little room．Some children watched the m from the shadows as They entered．Something lay beneath a blanket on the floor in one corner．A man and an old woman stood near the body．O liver was afraid to look at the m． With their thin faces and sharp teeth， They looked like the rats he had seen outside．
　　As Sowerberry began to measure the body for a coffin， the man knelt on the floor and cried out， 'She starved to death，I tell you！That's why she died！'He fell to the floor，and all the children behind him started to cry．Sowerberry and O liver，their work done，left as fast as They could．
　　They returned the next day with the coffin and four men from the workhouse who were to carry it．The man and the old woman followed the coffin to the church，and waited silently by the grave for the priest to arrive．When at last he came， he hurried through the burial prayers， and as quickly as possible（it was only a job，after all） the coffin was put into the ground. At this point the husband， who had not moved once during his wife's burial- not even during the long wait for the priest-suddenly fainted to the ground and had to have cold water thrown over him．
　　'So how did you like it，O liver？'asked Sowerberry later，as they walked home.
　　'Not very much， sir，'O liver answered truthfully．
　　'You'll get used to it，my boy.'
　　O liver wondered how long that would take，and remained silent all the way back to the shop，thinking about everything that he had seen and heard.



■ 3 O liver goes to London
　　O liver was now officially an undertaker's assistant．It was a good，sickly time of year，and coffins were selling well. O liver gained a lot of experience in a short time，and was interested to see how brave some people were after a death in the family. During funerals for some rich people， for example，he saw that the people who had cried the loudest in church usually recovered the fastest afterwards．He noticed how in other wealthy families the wife or the husband often seemed quite cheerful and calm despite the recent death-just as if nothing had happened．O liver was very surprised to see all this， and greatly admired the m for controlling their sadness so well.
　　He was treated badly by most of the people around him．Noah was jealous because O liver went out to burials while he was left back in the shop，so he treated him even worse than before．Charlotte treated him badly because Noah did. And Mrs Sowerberry was his enemy because Mr Sowerberry was supposed to be his friend.
　　One day something happened which might seem unimportant，but which had a great effect on O liver's future. Noah was in a particularly bad mood one dinner-time，and so he tried to make O liver cry by hitting him，pulling his hair，and calling him horrible names. This was all unsuccessful， so he tried personal insults．
　　'Workhouse， how's your mother？' he asked．
　　'She's dead，'replied O liver，his face going red with emotion．
　　Noah hoped that O liver was going to cry， so he continued．
　　'What did she die of， Workhouse？'
　　'Of a broken heart， I was told．'And a tear rolled down O liver's cheek.
　　'Why are you crying，Workhouse？'
　　O liver remained silent，and Noah grew braver． 'You know，I feel very sorry for you，Workhouse，but the truth is your mother was a wicked woman．'
　　O liver seemed suddenly to wake up. 'What did you say？'
　　'She was so bad it was lucky she died， or she would have ended up in prison，or hung.'
　　His face bright red with anger，O liver jumped up， seized Noah's throat， and shook the older boy so violently that his teeth nearly fell out. The n he hit him with all his strength and knocked him to the ground．
　　'He'll murder me！'screamed Noah． 'Charlotte！ Help！O liver's gone mad—'
　　Charlotte and Mrs Sowerberry ran in and screamed in horror．They took hold of O liver and began to heat him． The n Noah got up and started to kick him from behind．When They were all tired， They forced O liver， who was still fighting and shouting， into the cellar and locked it．
　　Mrs Sowerberry sat down， breathing heavily． 'He's like a wild animal！'she said． 'We could all have been murdered in our beds！'
　　'I hope Mr Sowerberry doesn't take any more of the se dreadful creatures from the workhouse，'said Charlotte． 'Poor Noah was nearly killed！'Mrs Sowerberry looked at Noah sympathetically.
　　Noah， who was twice O liver's size， pretended to rub tears from his eyes．
　　'What shall we do？' cried Mrs Sowerberry． 'He'll kick that door down in ten minutes.' They could hear O liver banging and kicking at the cellar door． 'Noah-run and get Mr Bumble．'
　　So Noah ran through the streets as quickly as he could to fetch the beadle． When he reached the workhouse， he waited for a minute to make sure his face was suitably tearful and frightened.
　　As soon as Mr Bumble came out，Noah cried， 'Mr Bumble！Mr Bumble！ It's O liver Twist，sir．He's become violent．He tried to murder me， sir！ And Charlotte， and Mrs Sowerberry as well.'
　　Mr Bumble was shocked and angry． 'Did he？I'll come up the re immediately and beat him with my stick．'
　　When he arrived at the shop，O liver was still kicking wildly at the cellar door.
　　'Let me out！'he shouted from the cellar，when he heard Mr Bumble's voice． 'I'm not afraid of you！'
　　Mr Bumble stopped for a moment，amazed and even rather frightened by this change in O liver． The n he said to Mrs Sowerberry， 'It's the meat that's caused this， you know.'
　　'What？'
　　'Meat， madam. You've fed him too well here. Back in the workhouse this would never have happened.'
　　'I knew I was too generous to him，'said Mrs Sowerberry，raising her eyes to the ceiling．
　　At that moment Mr Sowerberry returned and，hearing what had happened（according to the ladies）， he beat O liver so hard that even Mr Bumble and Mrs Sowerberry were satisfied． Mr Sowerberry was not a cruel man，but he had no choice. He knew that if he didn't punish O liver， his wife would never forgive him．
　　That night， alone in the room with the coffins，O liver cried bitter， lonely tears． He did not sleep， and very early in the morning， before anyone was awake， he quietly unlocked the shop door and left the house． He ran up the street and through the town as far as the main road，where he saw a sign that told him it was just seventy miles from the re to London. The name London gave the boy an idea．That huge place！ Nobody， not even Mr Bumble， could ever find him the re！He had heard old men in the workhouse say it was a good place for brave boys，and that the re was always work the re for those that wanted it．It would be the best place for him．He jumped to his feet and walked forward again．
　　But after only four miles he began to realize just how far he would have to walk． He stopped to think about it． He had a piece of bread， a rough shirt， two pairs of socks and a penny. But he could not see how the se would help him get to London any faster， so he continued walking．
　　He walked twenty miles that day． The only thing he had to eat was his piece of bread and some water which he begged from houses near the road. He slept the first night in a field，feeling lonely， tired， cold and hungry. He was even hungrier the next morning when he woke up， and he had to buy some more bread with his penny．That day he walked only twelve miles． His legs were so weak that They shook beneath him．
　　The next day he tried to beg for money， but large signs in some villages warned him that anyone caught begging would be sent to prison. Travellers on the road refused to give him money； They said he was a lazy young dog and didn't deserve anything. Farmers threatened to send their dogs after him．When he waited outside pubs，the pub－owners chased him away because They thought he had come to steal something．Only two people were kind enough to feed him： an old woman and a gate－keeper on the road. If They had not given him some food， he surely would have died like his mother.
　　Early on the seventh morning of his journey， O liver finally reached the little town of Barnet，just outside London. Exhausted，he sat down at the side of the road. His feet were bleeding and he was covered in dust． He was too tired even to beg．The n he noticed that a boy， who had passed him a few minutes before，had returned， and was now looking at him carefully from the opposite side of the road． After a long time the boy crossed the road and said to O liver，
　　'Hello！ What's the matter the n？'
　　The boy was about O liver's age， but was one of the strangest-looking people he had ever seen. He had a dirty，ordinary boy's face， but he behaved as if he were an adult． He was short for his age and had little， sharp，ugly eyes. His hat was stuck on top of his head but it looked as though it would blow off at any minute． He wore a man's coat which reached almost down to his feet， with sleeves so long that his hands were completely covered.
　　'I'm very tired and hungry，'answered O liver， almost crying． 'I've been walking for a week．'
　　'A week！ The magistrate's order， was it？'
　　'The magistrate？What's that？'
　　'A magistrate's a kind of judge，'explained the surprised young gentleman. He realized O liver did not have much experience of the world． 'Never mind that．You want some food，' he went on. 'I haven't got much money but don't worry－I'll pay．'
　　The boy helped O liver to his feet， and took him to a pub. Meat， bread， and beer were placed before O liver， and his new friend urged him to satisfy his hunger． While O liver was eating， the strange boy looked at him from time to time with great attention．
　　'Going to London？' he asked him finally．
　　'Yes.'
　　'Got anywhere to live？'
　　'No．'
　　'Money？'
　　'No．'
　　The strange boy whistled， and put his arms into his pockets as far as the big coat sleeves would allow him． 'I suppose you want to sleep somewhere tonight， don't you？'
　　'I do，' replied O liver． 'I haven't slept under a roof since I started my journey．'
　　'Well， don't worry．I've got to be in London tonight， and I know a very nice old gentleman the re who'll let you live in his place and not even ask you for money！'
　　O liver was deeply grateful for this offer of shelter and talked for a long time with his new friend． His name was Jack Dawkins， but he was usually called 'The Artful Dodger'． 'Artful' because he was very clever at getting what he wanted；and 'Dodger' because he was very good at not getting caught when he did something wrong．When he heard this，O liver felt rather doubtful about having such a friend．However，he wanted first to meet the kind old gentleman in London，who would help him．After that，he could decide whether to continue the friendship with the Artful Dodger．



■ 4 O liver in London
　　For some reason the Dodger did not want to enter London during daylight，so it was nearly eleven o'clock at night when They got near the centre. O liver had never seen a dirtier or more miserable place. The streets in this district were narrow and muddy， and the re were terrible smells everywhere. Children wandered around even at this time of night，in and out of the many shops，playing and screaming．The pubs were full of people fighting，and big，evil－looking men stood in doorways or at dark corners． O liver almost wanted to run away， but just the n the Dodger pushed open a door and pulled O liver into a dark hall.
　　'Who's the re？' a voice cried out．
　　'It's me，' said the Dodger． The faint light of a candle appeared in the hall．
　　'Who's the other one？'
　　'A new friend. '
　　They went up some dark and broken stairs．O liver could hardly see where he was going，but the Dodger seemed to know the way， and helped O liver up. They entered a room with walls that were black with age and dirt．In front of the fire was a table with a candle stuck into a bottle of beer， and an old man， with a horribly ugly face and red hair， stood next to the fire cooking. He was wearing a dirty old coat and seemed to divide his attention between his cooking and a number of silk handkerchieves， which were hanging near the fire．The re were several rough beds in the room．Four or five boys， about the same age as the Artful Dodger， sat round the table， smoking and drinking like middle-aged men．They all looked up when the Dodger and O liver entered．
　　'This is him，Fagin，' the Dodger said to the old man． 'My friend O liver Twist．'
　　Fagin smiled and shook O liver's hand．The n all The young gentlemen came up to him and shook both his hands very hard， especially the hand which held his few possessions. One of the boys was particularly kind．He even put his hands in O liver's pockets so that O liver would not have to empty the m himself when he went to bed．The boys would probably have been even more helpful， but Fagin hit the m on their heads and shoulders until They left O liver alone．
　　'We're very glad to see you，O liver，'said Fagin. 'I see you're staring at the handkerchieves， my dear．Aren't the re a lot？We've just taken the m all out to wash the m， that's all！Ha！ Ha！ Ha！'
　　This seemed to be a joke， as the old gentleman and all his young friends gave loud shouts of laughter. The n supper began. O liver ate his share of the food and was the n given a glass of gin-and-water．Fagin told him to drink it fast．Immediately afterwards，O liver felt himself lifted onto one of the beds and he sank into a deep sleep．
　　When he woke，it was late morning．Fagin was the only other person in the room， and he was boiling coffee in a pan．When the coffee was done，he turned towards O liver and looked closely at the boy．O liver was only just awake and his eyes were half－closed， so he seemed to be still fast asleep. Fagin the n locked the door and from a hidden hole in the floor，he took out a small box， which he placed carefully on the table． His eyes shone as he opened it and took out a gold watch covered in jewels.
　　'Aah！' he said to himself． 'What fine men They were！Loyal to the end. They never told the priest where the jewels were． Nor about old Fagin．Not even at the very end． And why should They？ It was already too late．It wouldn't have stopped the rope going round their necks！'
　　Fagin took out at least six more watches， as well as rings and bracelets and many other valuable pieces of jewellery． He looked at the m with pleasure， the n replaced the m. 'What a good thing hanging is！'he murmured． 'Dead men can never talk，or betray old friends！'
　　At that moment he looked up and saw O liver watching him．He closed the lid of the box with a loud crash，and picked up a bread knife from the table． 'Why are you watching me？ What have you seen？ Tell me－quick！'
　　'I couldn't sleep any longer，sir，'said O liver， terrified. 'I'm very sorry．'
　　'You weren't awake an hour ago？'Fagin asked fiercely，still holding the knife.
　　'I promise I was n't， sir，' replied O liver．
　　'Don't worry， my dear，' Fagin said， putting down the knife and becoming once again the kind old gentleman． He laughed． 'I only tried to frighten you，my dear. You're a brave boy，O liver！ And did you see any of the pretty things？'
　　'Yes， sir. '
　　'Ah，' said Fagin， turning rather pale． 'They-They're mine， O liver．All I have，in my old age．'
　　O liver wondered why the old man lived in such an old， dirty place，when he had so many watches， but the n he thought that it must cost Fagin a lot of money to look after the Dodger and the other boys．So he said nothing，and got up and washed．When he turned towards Fagin， the box had disappeared．
　　Soon the Dodger entered with a cheerful young man named Charley Bates．
　　'Have you been at work this morning？'Fagin asked the Dodger．
　　'Hard at work，'answered the Dodger．
　　'Good boys，good boys！'said Fagin． 'What have you got？'
　　'A couple of pocket－books and some handkerchieves．'
　　'Good workers， aren't They， O liver？' said the old man．
　　'Very good，' said O liver． The others all started laughing，though O liver saw nothing funny in his answer. Fagin inspected the handkerchieves and told the two boys that They were extremely well made and that he was very pleased with their work.
　　After breakfast They played a very strange game. The cheerful old man put a watch in his jacket pocket， with a guard-chain round his neck，and a notebook and a handkerchief in his trouser pocket．The n he went up and down the room holding a walking stick，just like the old gentlemen who walked in the streets. Sometimes he stopped at the fireplace， and sometimes at the door， pretending to stare with great interest into shop windows．He would the n constantly look round， as if afraid of thieves， touching all his pockets in such a natural and funny way that O liver laughed until tears ran down his face．All the time， the two boys followed Fagin everywhere，and every time he turned round， They moved out of his sight so quickly that it was impossible to follow their movements.
　　Finally， the Dodger bumped into him accidentally from behind， and at that moment both boys took from him，very quickly， his watch， guard－chain，handkerchief，and notebook．If the old man felt a hand in any of his pockets he cried out， and the n the game began again.
　　Later， the boys went out again to do some more work. When They had gone，Fagin turned to O liver． 'Take my advice， my dear，'he said． 'Make the m your models. Especially the Dodger． He'll be a great man himself， and will make you one too, if you copy him. Is my handkerchief hanging out of my pocket, my dear
 '
　　'Yes, sir, 'said O liver.
　　'See if you can take it out, without my feeling it. Just as you saw the m doing it when we were playing. '
　　O liver held up the bottom of the pocket with one hand, as he had seen the Dodger hold it, and pulled the handkerchief lightly out of it with the other.
　　'Has it gone
 'asked Fagin.
　　'Here it is, sir, 'said O liver, showing it in his hand.
　　'You're a clever boy, my dear, 'said the old gentleman, putting his hand on O liver's head. I've never seen a quicker boy. If you go on like this, you'll be the greatest man in London. Now come here and I'll show you how to take the marks out of handkerchieves. '
　　O liver wondered what the connection was between playing at stealing from the old gentleman's pocket and becoming a great man. But he followed him quietly to the table and was soon deeply involved in his new study.
　　O liver remained in Fagin's room for many days, picking the marks and names out of the handkerchieves and sometimes playing the same game as before. One evening two young ladies came to visit, and a very cheerful party followed. O liver thought They were very nice, friendly girls.
　　The Dodger and Charley Bates went out to work every day, but sometimes came home with no handkerchieves, and Fagin would get very angry. Once he even knocked the m both down the stairs and sent the m to bed with no dinner because They had returned with nothing.
　　At last, the morning came when O liver was allowed to go out to work with the two other boys The re had been no handkerchieves for him to work on for several days and the re was not very much to eat for dinner. The three boys set out, but They walked so slowly that O liver thought They were not going to work at all. The n suddenly the Dodger stopped and put his finger to his lips.
　　'What's the matter
 'demanded O liver.
　　'Be quiet! 'replied the Dodger. 'Do you see that old man outside the book shop
 He's the one. '
　　O liver looked from the Dodger to Charley Bates with great surprise and confusion, but he had been told not to ask questions. The two boys walked quickly and secretly across the road towards the old gentleman. O liver followed behind the m, watching in silent amazement.
　　The old gentleman looked quite rich; he wore gold glasses, white trousers, and had an expensive walking stick under his arm. He had picked up a book and was standing the re, reading it with great concentration—just as if he were in his own armchair at home. O liver, his eyes wide with horror and alarm, watched as the Dodger put his hand in the old gentleman's pocket, took out a hand kerchief, and hand ed it to Charley Bates. The n the two of the m ran round the corner as fast as They could.
　　Suddenly, the whole mystery of the handkerchieves, and the watches, and the jewels, and Fagin, became clear. O liver stood for a moment in terror, blood rushing through him until he felt he was on fire. The n, confused and frightened, he started to run. At the same time, the old gentleman, putting his hand to his pocket and realizing his hand kerchief was missing, turned round. He saw O liver running away, so he naturally thought O liver was the thief. With loud cries of 'Stop thief! ', he ran after O liver with the book still in his hand .
　　The old gentleman was not the only one who started shouting. The Dodger and Charley Bates, not wanting to attract attention to the mselves by running down the street, had stopped round the first corner. When They realized what was happening, They also shouted' Stop thief! 'and joined in the chase like good citizens.
　　The cry of 'Stop thief! 'always causes great excitement. Everybody in the street stopped what They were doing and began to shout the mselves. Many joined in the chase with enthusiasm and soon the re was a big crowd running after O liver.
　　Finally, They caught the exhausted boy. He fell down on the pavement and the crowd gathered round him.
　　'Is this the boy
 'They asked the old gentleman.
　　'Yes, 'he answered, leaning over O liver. 'But I'm afraid he's hurt himself. '
　　'I did that, 'said a huge young man proudly. 'And I hurt my hand doing it. 'The old gentleman looked at him with an expression of dislike.
　　O liver lay on the ground, covered with mud and dust and bleeding from the mouth, and looked wildly at all the faces surrounding him. At that moment a policeman arrived and took O liver by the collar. 'Come on, get up, 'he said roughly.
　　'It wasn't me, sir, 'said O liver, looking round. 'It was two other boys. They're here somewhere. '
　　'Oh no, They aren't, 'replied the policeman. In fact, he was right, as the Dodger and Charley had quietly disappeared as soon as the crowd had caught O liver. 'Come on, get up! '
　　'Don't hurt him, 'said the old gentleman.
　　'I won't, said the policeman, tearing O liver's jacket half off his back as he lifted him up.
　　The three of the m started walking, followed by the excited crowd.



■ 5 O liver's life changes
　　O liver was taken to the nearest police station. The officer at the gate looked at the boy. 'Another young thief, eh
 'He turned to the old gentleman, 'Are you the person who was robbed, sir
 '
　　'Yes, I am, 'replied the old gentleman, 'but I'm not sure that this boy actually took the hand kerchief. I don't really want to take him to court. '
　　'Too late. He must go before the magistrate now. '
　　O liver was locked in a small stone cell, which was disgustingly dirty and smelly As the key turned in the lock, the old gentleman said to himself thoughtfully, 'The re's something in that boy's face… He could be innocent. Where have I seen someone like him before
 'After thinking about this for a few minutes, he said, 'No; it must be imagination. 'He sighed unhappily, and began reading the book again.
　　Some time later, the officer touched his shoulder and told him that the court was ready. A magistrate was a judge who dealt with small crimes in local courts, and the magistrate for this district was well known. His name was Mr Fang and he was a disagreeable, bad-tempered man. Today he was in a particularly bad mood. He frowned angrily at the old gentleman, and asked sharply,
　　'Who are you
 '
　　'My name, sir, is Brown low . '
　　'Officer! What is this man charged with
 '
　　'He's not charged, sir, 'answered the officer. 'He's accusing the boy. '
　　The magistrate looked at Mr Brown low from head to foot. 'And what have you got to say
 '
　　Mr Brown low began to explain. 'I was standing outside a book shop—'
　　'Be quiet, sir! 'shouted Mr Fang. 'Policeman! Now－you arrested the boy. What happened
 '
　　The policeman told the magistrate what he had heard, and how he had searched O liver afterwards and found nothing.
　　'Are the re any witnesses
 'asked the magistrate.
　　'None, 'answered the policeman.
　　Mr Fang the n turned to Mr Brown low and angrily told him to describe what had happened. Mr Brown low explained that he had run after the boy only because he saw him running away. He did not think that the boy was the actual thief and he hoped that the boy would not be punished. 'He's been hurt already, 'he added, 'and now I'm afraid he's very ill. '
　　'I don't believe that for a moment, 'said Mr Fang unpleasantly. He turned to O liver. 'Come now, don't try any clever tricks with me! What's your name
 'he demanded.
　　O liver tried to reply, but he was too weak to speak. He was deadly pale, and he felt the room spinning round him. At last he managed to whisper a request for water, but the magistrate refused angrily. Suddenly, O liver fainted and fell to the floor.
　　Mr Fang stared at him angrily. 'Guilty. Three months 'prison, 'he said immediately. 'Let him lie the re. He'll soon be tired of that. 'Mr Fang stood up. 'This court is now closed. '
　　At that moment a man in an old black coat rushed in. 'Stop! 'he shouted. 'Don't take the boy away. I saw it all. I'm the book shop owner. '
　　Mr Fang's face was black with anger at this unexpected interruption, but the book shop owner demanded to be heard. He described exactly what had really happened. He had seen two boys steal the hand kerchief and the n run away, leaving O liver to be arrested.
　　In a final burst of bad temper, Mr Fang said that his time had been wasted. He announced that O liver was innocent, and ordered everybody out of the court.
　　The order was obeyed, and as Mr Brown low turned to go down the street, he saw O liver lying on the pavement, shaking, his face as white as death.
　　'Poor boy! Poor boy! 'said Mr Brown low , bending over him. He called a coach quickly, laid O liver on the seat, and drove away.
　　The coach stopped at a neat house in a quiet, shady street in north London. O liver was gently carried in to a bed, and received more care and kindness than he had ever had in his life. But he had a fever, and for many days he lay the re unconscious. When he eventually awoke, weak, thin and pale, he looked anxiously around the room.
　　'What room is this
 Where am I
 'he said. 'This is not the place I fell asleep in. '
　　Mrs Bed win, the motherly old housekeeper, heard his words, and instantly came to him. 'Hush—be quiet, my dear, or you'll be ill again. Lie down. '
　　He lay down, and woke up again much later. After a while, he was able to sit up in a chair, although he was still too weak to walk. In this new position he could see a picture of a woman hanging on the wall opposite. 'Who is that, madam
 'he asked the old housekeeper.
　　'I don't know, my dear. Do you like it
 '
　　'The eyes look so sad, and They seem to be staring at me. As if the person was alive, and wanted to speak to me but couldn't. '
　　'You're weak and nervous after your illness, 'Mrs Bed win said kindly. 'Don't worry about things like that. '
　　Later that day Mr Brown low came in, having heard that the boy was a little better at last. He was delighted to see that O liver could sit up. But when he saw O liver's face clearly, Mr Brown low stared hard at him.
　　'I hope you're not angry with me, sir, 'said O liver anxiously.
　　'No, no. Not in the least, 'he replied. The n he turned to the housekeeper. 'But look, Mrs Bed win, look the re! 'He pointed to the picture of the woman above O liver's head and the n to the boy's face. It was a living copy of the picture; even the expression was the same. O liver did not understand what was happening. He was so alarmed by Mr Brown low 's excitement that he fainted once more.
　　The Dodger and Charley Bates had left the crowd which was chasing O liver as soon as They could. They went back to their house through the narrow streets, using a complicated route in case anyone was following the m. Once They were safely away from other people, Charley Bates rolled on the ground and laughed and laughed.
　　'Ha! Ha! Ha! When I saw O liver running away so fast, round all the corners, bumping into walls… and all the time I had the hand kerchief in my pocket… Ha! Ha! Ha! '
　　'But what'll Fagin say
 'asked the Dodger.
　　'What do you mean
 '
　　The Dodger said nothing more but led Charley Bates into the house and up the stairs. When Fagin saw the m enter, he rose to his feet.
　　'Where's O liver
 'he asked the m furiously.
　　The two boys looked uneasily at each other, but said nothing. Fagin took hold of the Dodger's collar and shook him violently. 'Tell me or I'll kill you! '
　　The Dodger slid out of his coat in one smooth movement, leaving Fagin holding only the empty coat. 'The police have got him, 'he said reluctantly. He looked round for a weapon to fight with, but Fagin already had a heavy metal pot in his hand ．He threw it hard at the Dodger, but missed and hit Charley Bates, who started to shout with fear.
　　Suddenly, all this noise and confusion was silenced by a deep voice at the door.
　　'What the devil's going on here
 'the voice demanded.
　　The owner of the voice was a big man of about thirty-five in a black coat and very dirty trousers, with a brown hat on his head and a dirty hand kerchief around his neck. He also had a three-day-old beard. A white dog with torn ears followed him into the room. The man kicked the dog into a corner and looked round at the signs of battle.
　　'Are They trying to murder you, Fagin
 I would if I was the m. I'd have done it long ago. Now, give me some beer, and don't poison it. '
　　It was said as a joke, but if the man had seen the evil look on Fagin's face, he might have thought the warning was a necessary one.
　　Fagin produced some beer, and as the fight appeared to be over, everybody sat down. In the conversation that followed, Fagin told the newcomer that O liver had been caught by the police. 'I'm afraid, Mr Sikes, 'he said, 'the boy may say something which will get us into trouble. '
　　'Very likely, 'said Bill Sikes, smiling unkindly. 'You'vegot problems, Fagin. '
　　'And I'm afraid, 'added Fagin, ignoring Sikes' remark, 'that if we're in trouble, the n a lot of other people will be in trouble too, if you understand me, my dear, '
　　Sikes turned angrily towards the old man. The re was a silence. The n Sikes said, 'Somebody must find out what's happened. If he hasn't said anything yet, we must catch him when he leaves the police station. '
　　Fagin nodded. But the re was a difficulty. None of the m wanted to go anywhere near a Police station. The problem was solved with the arrival of the two young ladies whom O liver had met one evening in Fagin's house.
　　'Nancy, my dear, 'Fagin said. He smiled sweetly at one of The young ladies. 'Can you go to find out what's happened to O liver
 '
　　The young lady answered calmly, 'No, I won't. '
　　'You're the only one here that the police in this district don't know, 'said Sikes. 'She'll go, Fagin. '
　　'No, 'repeated Nancy.
　　'Yes, she will, Fagin. 'Sikes was right. With a mixture of threats and promises, he soon persuaded Nancy to go.
　　She set off at once, and at the police station pretended to be a shy, frightened girl. 'Is my poor little brother O liver here
 'she asked the officer with the keys.
　　'He's not here, 'the officer replied. 'The gentleman's got him. '
　　'The gentleman
 Oh no! What gentleman
 'cried Nancy, very upset.
　　The policeman explained that O liver had become ill, and the old gentleman had taken him to his house in the Pentonville district of north London. Nancy, still looking terribly upset, left the station, and hurried back to Fagin's house with this news. As soon as he heard it, Sikes called his white dog, put on his hat and left without saying goodbye to anyone.
　　'We must find him, 'Fagin said urgently to the rest of the m. 'No one can stay here—it's too dangerous now. All of you—walk around Pentonville and keep your ears open. Don't come back until you have some news of O liver! If you can, kidnap him! We've got to keep him quiet before he starts talking about us to his new friends. '
　　With the se words, he pushed the m all from his room and double-locked the door behind the m. The n he took out his hidden box and very carefully hid all the watches and the jewellery beneath his clothe s.



■ 6 O liver is found again
　　O liver began to recover and slowly regain his strength. The picture that had caused Mr Brown low 's excitement was taken down from the wall, and was not mentioned again. O liver was disappointed at the disappearance of the picture, since he liked the woman's face, but he had many other things to think about now.
　　They were happy days, while O liver was getting better. He played cards with Mrs Bed win and listened to stories about her family. The days were all so quiet and relaxing, after the hardships and poverty of his previous life. Mr Brown low bought him a new suit and new shoes, and O liver's dirty old clothe s were given away.
　　One day Mr Brown low asked him to come to his study for a little talk.
　　O liver went in and sat down. He looked at Mr Brown low 's serious face in alarm. 'Don't tell me you're going to send me away, sir, please! 'he exclaimed. 'Let me stay here! I could help with the housework…please, sir! '
　　'My dear child, don't be afraid, 'said Mr Brown low kindly. 'I won't desert you. I believe that you're a good boy, not a common thief. You told me you're an orphan—that seems to be the truth. But I want to hear now the whole story of your life, and how you came to be with the boys I saw you with that day. '
　　O liver began his story but was soon interrupted by the arrival of Mr Grimwig, an old friend of Mr Brown low 's. Mr Grimwig was a fierce old gentleman and very fond of arguments. He clearly knew all about O liver and inspected him closely.
　　'So this is the boy, is it
 'he said at last.
　　O liver bowed politely and was introduced by Mr Brown low . Tea was the n brought in, and during the meal Mr Grimwig stared so hard at O liver that the boy felt rather confused. Eventually, Mr Grimwig whispered to Mr Brown low , 'He may be a good-looking boy, but I think he's deceiving you, my good friend, '
　　'Nonsense! 'said Mr Brown low , becoming angry.
　　'Well, we'll see, answered his friend. 'We'll see. '
　　Later that afternoon Mr Brown low wanted to return some books to a bookseller, and to send some money for new books that he had already collected. Mr Grimwig suggested that O liver should go. 'He'll be sure to deliver everything safely, 'he said with a smile.
　　'Yes, please let me take the m, 'said O liver, delighted to be of use.
　　Mr Brown low hesitated, but Mr Grimwig's smile had annoyed him. 'Very well, 'he said. 'Here are the books, O liver, and a five-pound note. The bookseller will give you ten shillings change. '
　　'I won't be ten minutes, 'replied O liver eagerly, and he ran out into the street.
　　'So you expect him to come back, do you
 'enquired Mr Grimwig.
　　'Yes, I do, 'said Mr Brown low , smiling confidently. 'Don't you
 '
　　'No, He has a new suit of clothe s, some valuable books, and a five-pound note in his pocket. He'll join his old friends the thieves, and laugh at you. If he comes back, I'll eat my hat. '
　　The two men sat by the window with a pocket-watch between the m, and waited for O liver's return.
　　O liver hurried through the streets to the book shop, thinking how lucky he was. Suddenly the re was a loud scream behind him. 'Oh, my dear brother! 'Before be could look round, a pair of arms was thrown tightly around his neck.
　　'Don't! 'he cried, struggling. 'Let go! Why are you stopping me
 Who is it
 '
　　The young woman holding him started to cry loudly. 'I've found him! Oh! O liver! You naughty boy, to make me suffer so much! Come home immediately, you cruel boy! 'She burst into tears and several people stopped to stare at what was happening.
　　'What's the matter
 'asked one of the watching women.
　　'He ran away from his parents a month ago, 'The young woman said. 'They're hard-working, respectable people, and he left the m to join a gang of thieves and bad characters, and almost broke his mother's heart. '
　　'Go home, you horrible child, 'said another woman.
　　'Yes—go back to your parents, 'said a third.
　　'But I haven't got any! 'replied O liver, greatly alarmed. 'I haven't got a sister, either. I'm an orphan. I live in Pentonville. '
　　'Listen to him! Make him come home, 'The young woman said to the crowd, 'or he'll kill his dear mother and father, and break my heart. '
　　Suddenly O liver recognized the woman he had seen in Fagin's house. 'It's Nancy! 'he said, without thinking.
　　'You see
 'cried Nancy to the crowd. 'He knows me! '
　　Just the n a big man ran out of a beer shop, followed by a white dog. 'What's this
 Young O liver! Come home to your poor mother, you young devil! And what books are the se
 You've stolen the m, haven't you
 Give the m to me. 'The man, who was Bill Sikes, seized O liver with one strong hand and hit him on the head with the other.
　　'That'll do him good! 'shouted some of the crowd. 'It's the only way to treat boys like him. '
　　Bill Sikes held onto O liver's arm. 'Come on, you young thief! '
　　Still weak from illness, and terrified by the growling dog, O liver could not resist. He was taken through the dark narrow streets at great speed. Sikes and Nancy gave him no chance to escape and O liver had no breath to call out for help. All too quickly, he was back in Fagin's house, where his old friends were waiting for him.
　　'Delighted to see you looking so well, my dear, 'Fagin said, bowing politely. 'Why didn't you write, and say you were coming
 We'd have got something warm for supper. '
　　The Dodger and Charley Bates roared with laughter, and the Dodger began looking through the books O liver had with him.
　　'Give the m back! 'O liver cried. 'Those books belong to the kind old gentleman who took me into his home. Send him back the books and the money—he'll think I stole the m! '
　　'You're right, 'laughed Fagin. 'He will think that! '
　　O liver jumped to his feet and ran wildly from the room, shouting for help. The Dodger and Fagin caught him easily, and brought him back. The n the old man picked up a long piece of wood.
　　'So you wanted to get away, my dear, did you
 Wanted to call the police and get help
 We'll cure you of that. '
　　He hit O liver hard on the shoulders with the stick. He was raising it for a second hit when Nancy rushed forward and, seizing the piece of wood, threw it into the fire.
　　'I won't let you do it, Fagin! 'she shouted. 'You've got him again. Isn't that enough
 Now leave him alone. '
　　Fagin and Sikes looked at each other, shocked by her reaction.
　　'You'd better keep quiet, my girl, 'growled Sikes.
　　'No, I won't! ' cried the girl wildly. 'Now you've got the boy, you'll turn him into a thief and a liar. Isn't that enough, without killing him too
 '
　　She rushed at Fagin and would have hit him if Sikes had not held her arms so tightly that she couldn't move. She struggled wildly for a while, the n, exhausted, she fainted. Sikes laid her down in the corner, as surprised as Fagin at her anger.
　　'She can be really wild when she's angry, 'Sikes said.
　　Fagin wiped his forehead. 'That's the trouble with women, 'he said, 'but she's a clever girl in her work. '
　　The n Charley Bates and the Dodger took away O liver's expensive new suit, gave him some old clothe s, and locked him up in a dark room. O liver felt tired and ill, and was soon fast asleep.



■ 7 The robbery
　　A few days later, a visitor arrived in London from O liver's home town. He was a large, fat man, and very proud of his hat, which showed the world that he was a most important official. It was, in fact, Mr Bumble the beadle, O liver's old enemy.
　　Mr Bumble had completed his business in the city, and had just finished a most satisfactory meal in a pub. He pulled up his chair to the fire, to enjoy his hot gin-and-water in comfort, and opened the newspaper. The first thing he saw was this notice:
　　A reward of five pounds is offered for any information leading to the discovery of a young boy, O liver Twist, who was kidnapped from his home in Pentonville last Thursday evening. I am also very interested in any information about his past.
　　The re was the n a full description of O liver's clothe s and appearance, and Mr Brown low 's full address. Mr Bumble rubbed his eyes, read the notice again, and was at the address in less than ten minutes. He was shown into Mr Brown low 's study, where the old gentleman and his friend Mr Grimwig were sitting.
　　'Do you know where the poor boy is now
 'Mr Brown low asked, when the beadle had explained the reason for his visit.
　　Mr Bumble shook his head.
　　'Do you know anything good about him
 'asked Mr
　　Grimwig, looking closely at Mr Bumble's face.
　　Mr Bumble shook his head again, very seriously, and turned down the corners of his mouth.
　　'The n tell us everything you know about him, 'said Mr Brown low impatiently.
　　Mr Bumble put down his hat, unbuttoned his coat, folded his arms, and sat back in his chair. He spoke in his most important and official voice, and talked for twenty minutes. His listeners heard all the details of O liver's illegitimate birth, and how generously he had been treated as a workhouse orphan. They heard how he had always been an ungrateful and dangerous child, violently attacking another boy, and finally running away from the house where he had been working.
　　The old gentleman shook his head sadly and gave Mr Bumble the five pounds. 'I would have been happy to give you three times the amount if your story had proved that the boy was good. '
　　If Mr Bumble had known this earlier, he might have told a different story, but now it was too late. So he took the money and left.
　　Mr Brown low walked up and down his room for several minutes, deep in thought. He rang the bell for Mrs Bed win, his housekeeper, and told her what he had heard.
　　'I don't believe it, 'she said, with great certainty.
　　'I was right, 'said Mr Grimwig with satisfaction. 'You should have listened to what I said. '
　　Mr Brown low said angrily, 'Never let me hear the boy's name again. Never. Remember that, Mrs Bed win. '
　　The re were sad hearts at Mr Brown low 's house that night.
　　* * *
　　Meanwhile, in another part of London, O liver remained a prisoner. Fagin had told O liver how ungrateful he had been to run away. He had told him that he would have died of hunger without Fagin's kindness. He went on to tell O liver the story of another young boy, who had gone to the police to tell the m about the gang, but who had finally been hanged one morning for being a thief. Fagin described the hanging in terrifying detail, and said that he hoped he would never have to tell the police about O liver—and see O liver with a rope around his neck. O liver felt his blood turn cold.
　　He remained locked in a room for many days, seeing nobody between early morning and midnight. He spent his time thinking sadly about his friends in Pentonville. After a week he was free to wander round the house during the day. It was a dirty place, full of rats and insects but no other living thing. All the windows were closed, and covered with wood and metal bars that kept out the light.
　　One afternoon the Dodger and Charley Bates were at home and They started telling O liver about their lives as thieves.
　　'Why don't you become one
 'Charley asked him. 'We all are here—both of us, and Fagin, Sikes, Nancy…all of us.
　　'I don't want to be, 'replied O liver. 'I wish They'd let me go.
　　'But it's a good life, 'the Dodger said, taking some coins from his pocket and throwing the m up in the air. 'What does it matter where the money comes from
 'he said, laughing.
　　'If you don't steal it, someone else will. You can be sure of that! '
　　Fagin entered at this point, with two young men, and joined in the conversation. One of The young men had just come out of prison, and the re were many cheerful jokes about his very short hair-cut. Everybody sat around the fire, talking and laughing for hours Fagin told O liver how good the Dodger was at his job, and what a friendly boy Charley was. It was, without doubt, an interesting evening for O liver, after so many days locked up alone.
　　After that evening he was rarely on his own again. He spent a lot of time with the Dodger and Charley, and often played the hand kerchief game with the m. At other times Fagin would tell the m all about robberies he had committed in his younger days, telling the stories so well and putting in so many funny details that O liver could not stop laughing, even though he knew it was wrong.
　　Fagin knew what he was doing. He had made sure that O liver was so lonely and miserable that he would be desperate for any friends, however criminal. Slowly and deliberately, Fagin was trying to poison The young boy's mind.
　　One damp, cold, windy night a few weeks later, Fagin put on his heavy coat and, with the collar pulled up high to hide his face, left his home. He walked fast through the streets, never losing his way even in the darkest places. Finally, he reached an evil, narrow street lit only by a single lamp. He knocked on a door, said something quietly to the person who opened it, the n walked upstairs.
　　Bill Sikes was sitting by his fire with his dog when Fagin entered. The room was a small, dark place with almost no furniture. Nancy was the re, too, and Fagin glanced at her uneasily. He had not seen her since she had attacked him to stop him hitting O liver. However, she seemed to have forgotten all about it, because she told him to pull up a chair and warm himself by the fire.
　　'I'm ready for business, 'Bill Sikes said, looking at Fagin suspiciously. 'Say what you have to say, Fagin. '
　　'It's about the robbery at Chertsey, Bill, 'answered Fagin. 'Some lovely silver in that house down the re! '
　　'I know, I know, 'Sikes said. 'I was down the re two nights ago to have a look at the house. But it's locked like a prison at night, all except one part. '
　　'Where's that
 'asked Fagin, bending his head forwards, his eyes staring excitedly at Sikes.
　　'Do you think I'm stupid
 I'm not telling you! Anyway, what we need is a boy. '
　　'So the re's a small place where only a boy can enter the house
 'asked Fagin.
　　'Maybe. But we need a boy. '
　　The re was silence for a time, while Fagin thought. The n he made a sign to Sikes to tell Nancy to leave the room.
　　'Don't worry, Sikes said. 'You can trust her—she won't talk. Isn't that right
 '
　　'Of course it's right, 'answered The young woman, taking a large drink from the bottle on the table, and laughing. 'Anyway, Fagin, I know your idea is for O liver to do the job. '
　　'You're a clever girl, said Fagin, smiling evilly. 'That's exactly what I had in mind. Listen, Bill—the boy's been training for a few weeks, and it's time he did some work. He's the smallest one, anyway. '
　　'Is he safe
 'asked Sikes. 'Because if he tries any tricks on me, I'll kill him! '
　　'He'll be ours for life, if he feels he's one of us. And this job will make him feel like that, 'said Fagin eagerly. 'The boy looks so innocent he's perfect. And we've got to include him in some crime as soon as we can. Otherwise, if he escapes now, he can tell the police about us and stay free himself. '
　　So it was decided that O liver would help Sikes with the robbery in two days' time. The plan was discussed in great detail and all the arrangements made. By the n, Sikes was very drunk, and Fagin got up to leave. As he put on his coat, he stared hard at Nancy, frowning a little. No, he was sure he could trust her; she was loyal.
　　The next night, O liver was alone in Fagin's house when Nancy entered. She was so nervous and white-faced that O liver asked her if she was ill.
　　'God forgive me! 'she said, beating her hand s togethe r. 'I never thought I would do this! '
　　'Has anything happened
 'asked the boy. 'What is it
 '
　　She sat with her back to him, and hid her face with her hand s. After a while she said, 'I don't know why I feel so strange sometimes. Come on, O liver—are you ready
 You have to come with me to Bill's house. '
　　'Why
 '
　　'Oh—nothing important. '
　　O liver did not believe her, but he thought that at last this might be an opportunity to escape. So he said, rather too quickly, 'I'm ready. 'Nancy guessed what he was thinking.
　　'O liver, 'she said, 'this is not the time to escape. I've saved you once, and I will again, but if anything happens tonight, it might mean my death. 'She said this so seriously that O liver decided it must be true. He was quiet while They walked quickly through the streets to Sikes' house.
　　Inside his room, Sikes sat O liver down on a chair. 'Did he come quietly
 'he asked Nancy.
　　'Quiet as a mouse. '
　　'Glad to hear it, 'said Sikes. 'Now listen to me, boy. 'He put a gun against O liver's head. If you say one word when you're outside with me, I'll shoot you. Understand
 '
　　O liver nodded, trying hard not to tremble.
　　Sikes and O liver started out at five o'clock in the morning, while it was still dark. They crossed from one side of London to the other. At first the streets were empty, the n shopsbegan to open and people started going to work. Gradually, the noise and traffic increased, and as They passed through the meat market at Smithfield, O liver was amazed by the sight and smells of so many animals, and by the huge crowds of people, all pushing and swearing and shouting. But Bill Sikes marched on without stopping．
　　Later in the day They were given a lift in a horse and cart from west London out into the country. Night fell, and after walking a few more miles down country roads, They finally arrived at an old house standing alone by a river. It was dark and seemed to be empty They went inside without knocking.
　　Inside were two other men, who, at Sikes command, produced food and drink for him and the boy. The n Sikes told O liver to get some sleep as They would be going out again later that night. O liver still had no idea of the purpose of this expedition, but his head ached with tiredness and he soon fell asleep.
　　At half past one the men got up and checked their equipment, gathering several sticks as well. Sikes and the man called Toby left the house togethe r, with O liver walking between the m. The re was now a thick fog and the night was very still as They hurried through the deserted streets of the nearby town. Out in the country again, They walked down several small roads until finally They stopped at a house surrounded by a high wall. As quick as lightning, Toby climbed up and pulled O liver after him. Inside the garden, They crept towards the house, and now, for the first time, O liver realized in horror that the purpose of the expedition was robbery, and maybe even murder.
　　Bill Sikes broke open a small window at the back of the house, the n shone his light into O liver's face.
　　'Now listen. I'm going to put you through here．Go straight through into the hall and on to the front door, and let us in. And if you don't, you can be sure I'll shoot you．'
　　O liver, stupid with terror, was lifted through the window into the house. Desperately, he decided to try to run upstairs and warn the family. He began to creep forwards.
　　Suddenly, the re was a loud noise from the hall.
　　'Come back! ' shouted Sikes. 'Back! Back! '
　　O liver stood still, frozen with fear. A light appeared, the n two men on the stairs, the m a sudden bright flash, and a loud bang. O liver staggered back. Sikes seized the boy's collar through the window and pulled him back out into the garden.
　　'They've hit him! ' shouted Sikes. 'He's bleeding. '
　　A bell rang loudly, above the noise of more gunshots and the shouts of men. O liver felt himself being carried across rough ground, and the n he saw and heard no more



■ 8 After the robbery
　　The night was bitterly cold. A sharp wind whipped the fallen snow up into the air and blew it into every hole and corner. It was a night for the homeless to lie down and die; and for luckier people to sit close to their fires and thank God They were at home.
　　In the workhouse where O liver was born, Mrs Corney -the widow in charge- was making tea by her fire. When she heard a knock at her door, she frowned and called out sharply, 'Come in. ' The frown, however, was quickly changed to a sweet smile when she saw Mr Bumble enter.
　　'Hard weather, Mr Bumble, 'said the widow.
　　'Yes, indeed, ma'am, ' replied the beadle. 'We've had to give out to the poor people in this town great quantities of bread and cheese today, and They' re still complaining. Why, one man even came back and demanded some free fire-wood!
　　What does he want that for
 People are never satisfied. Give the m one thing today, and tomorrow They'll ask for something else! '
　　Mrs Corney agreed that it was very shocking. They discussed some workhouse business togethe r, and the n Mr
　　Bumble looked hopefully at the teapot. Mrs Corney offered him some tea. Instantly, Mr Bumble sat down by the fire and gave the widow such a warm smile that her face turned a delicate pink. She passed Mr Bumble the tea－cup, and as he took it, he managed to give her hand a little stroke. 'You're a kind－hearted woman, Mrs Corney, 'said the beadle.
　　'Oh, Mr Bumble! 'said the widow, smiling shyly. For a while the re was a friendly silence between the m, the n Mr Bumble moved his chair closer to the widow's. Mrs Corney, of course, did not notice this, but when the beadle's arm began to slide around her waist, she felt she must make a small protest.
　　Encouraged by this response, Mr Bumble immediately gave her a kiss, but at this interesting moment the re was a sudden knock at the door. Mr Bumble jumped to his feet and went to the other end of the room.
　　'Please, Mrs Corney, ' said a voice outside. 'Old Sally is going fast. '
　　'Well, what can I do to help her
 'asked Mrs Corney angrily.
　　'Nothing, ma'am, replied the old woman outside. But she says she has something to tell you, which you must hear. She won't die quietly till you come. '
　　Complaining loudly, Mrs Corney asked Mr Bumble to wait until she came back. The n she followed the old woman up the stairs.
　　Old Sally lay in bed in a freezing cold room. The fire was so small and mean that it gave no warmth at all.
　　Mrs Corney bent over the bed, and the dying woman opened her eyes. 'Come closer, 'she murmured. 'Let me whisper in your ear. ' She held onto Mrs Corney's arm and pulled her down towards her 'In this same room I once helped a pretty young woman who came in with cut and bleeding feet, who gave birth to a boy and the n died. '
　　'Well
 ' asked Mrs Corney impatiently.
　　'I robbed her. She was hardly dead before I stole it! '
　　'Stole what
 '
　　'It! The only thing she had. It was gold. It could have saved her life! '
　　'Gold
 Who was this mother
 Tell me! '
　　'She told me to look after it when she died. ' The old woman's mind was getting confused. 'She trusted me, poor girl, and I stole it. '
　　'Quick, tell me or it may be too late! ' said Mrs Corney greedily. ' What was it, and what was the boy's name
 '
　　The old woman could hardly speak．'O liver. The gold I stole was—'
　　'Yes, yes! What
 '
　　The old woman fell back onto the bed, dead.
　　Mrs Corney hurried back to her room, where Mr Bumble was still admiring her furniture and counting her silver tea-spoons. They sat down again by the fire, and soon Mr Bumble's arm returned to its previous position round Mrs Corney's waist. It was not long before he asked her to marry him, and the widow happily accepted him. While They drank to celebrate the arrangement, Mrs Corney told Mr Bumble about old Sally's death, and the unknown gold object which she had stolen from the dead body of The young woman.
　　After many expressions of undying love, Mr Bumble finally left the room and returned home, with bright visions of his future.
　　While the se events were happening in the workhouse, the Artful Dodger and Charley Bates were playing cards in Fagin's house. The Dodger, as usual, was winning easily; somehow, he always seemed to know exactly what cards the other players had in their hand s. Suddenly the re was a faint ring on the bell downstairs, and Toby came in-the man who had gone with Bill Sikes and O liver to rob the house in Chertsey. Fagin jumped to his feet.
　　'Where are They
 ' he screamed. 'Sikes and the boy! Where are They hiding
 '
　　'We failed, ' said the robber.
　　' What happened
 '
　　'They fired and hit the boy. We ran away with O liver between us, and They chased us with dogs. '
　　'And the boy
 What about the boy
 'gasped Fagin.
　　'His head was hanging down, and he was cold. We needed to go faster so we left him in a field, alive or dead That's all I know about him. '
　　Fagin did not wait to hear any more. He gave an angry scream, ran out of the house and hurried through the streets until he reached Bill Sikes' house． As he climbed the stairs, he thought, 'Well, Nancy, if the re' s anything going on here, I'll find out about it-however clever you are. '
　　Nancy was alone upstairs in her room, her head on the table.
　　'She's been drinking again, 'thought Fagin. As he closed the door, she woke up. He told her what had happened during the robbery; she said nothing and her head returned to the table. 'And where do you think the boy is now, my dear
 'Fagin asked her, trying hard to see her face. 'Poor little child! Left alone like that．'
　　Nancy looked up. 'I hope the child's dead. The n he'd be happier than any of us. '
　　'What! 'said Fagin, in amazement.
　　'It's better like that. The sight of the boy turns me against myself, and all of you. '
　　'You're drunk. Fagin suddenly lost his temper. 'The boy's worth a fortune to me-and now a drunken gang has lost him. And if Sikes doesn't return that boy to me, dead or alive, I'll tell the police about him and I'll get Sikes hanged. Just remember that! '
　　When Fagin left her, Nancy was already back in a drunken sleep, her head lying on the table once more. Fagin went out into the blackness of the night and walked home. He had reached the corner of his street and was searching in his pocket for his key, when a dark figure came out of the shadows and crossed the road towards him.
　　I've been waiting here for two hours, Fagin. ' said the stranger. 'Where have you been
 '
　　'On your business, my dear, ' said Fagin, glancing at him uneasily.
　　'We'd better talk inside. '
　　The door closed behind the m and They crept quietly up to the top floor in order not to wake the sleeping boys downstairs. They sat in a dark room, the only light coming from a candle burning in the passage outside.
　　The stranger's name was Monks, and he was in an evil mood.
　　He listened to Fagin for a while, frowning heavily. 'It was badly planned, he said angrily. 'Couldn't you have made the boy into an ordinary thief, and the n got him arrested and sent out of the country for the rest of his life
 '
　　'But he isn't like the other boys here, ' Fagin said. 'I had nothing to frighten him with. Anyway, I've already helped you. After he was caught by the police, stealing from the book shop, I got Nancy to get him back. And the n she felt sorry for him. '
　　'Kill her! ' Monks said impatiently.
　　'We can't afford to do that kind of thing, ' said Fagin.
　　'But I can turn the boy into an ordinary thief now. And the n Nancy will harden her heart against him. I know how women are. But if he's already dead—'
　　'That's not my fault! ' said Monks quickly. 'I always said to you- do anything you want to him, but don't kill him. I wouldn't have been able to forget it, if you had. '
　　Suddenly he jumped to his feet, staring at the wall opposite the door. 'What's that
 'he whispered, terrified.
　　'What
 Where
 ' cried Fagin.
　　'The shadow! I saw the shadow of a woman pass along that wall! '
　　White－faced, They both ran from the room into the passage. The candle threw long shadows down the stairs, but the re was no one the re. They listened. Only silence filled the house.
　　'It was your imagination, ' said Fagin, softly.
　　'I swear I saw it! replied Monks. They searched all the upstairs rooms. They were empty, and as quiet as death. Monks grew calmer, and eventually left the house at one o'clock in the morning.
　　The chase down at Chertsey the previous night had not lasted long. The re was a lot of noise of men shouting and dogs barking, as the servants from the house pursued the robbers across the fields. But Sikes and Toby wasted no time. They dropped O liver's unconscious body in a field, and disappeared into the fog and the darkness in different directions. The three pursuers lost enthusiasm for the chase and agreed among themselves that it was much too dangerous to continue. They returned to the house, keeping close together and trying to look brave.
　　Morning came, but O liver still lay in the field as if dead. It began to rain heavily, and after a while O liver opened his eyes. His left arm was covered in blood and hurting badly. He felt so weak he could hardly stand, but he knew that if he stayed where he was, he would die. Gasping with pain, he forced himself to his feet and with slow, shaky steps, began to walk. He had no idea where he was going, and moved forward mechanically, as though in a dream.
　　After a while his feet found a road, and he looked round and saw a house in the distance. He decided he would rather die near human beings than in a cold field, so he turned his steps towards the house. As he came nearer, he realized that the house was familiar and he felt faint with terror. But where else could he go
 With a last effort, he crawled up the path and knocked on the door, the n fell exhausted on the step.
　　It was now mid－morning. Inside the house the men servants were still describing the night's adventures to the cook and the servant girl, who gasped with appreciative horror at every exciting moment. They were all enjoying themselves very much- when the re came a knock at the door. Pale with fright, They all stared at each other. Nobody was keen to answer the knock, so eventually They all went, including the dogs. Very cautiously, They opened the door, and saw nothing more alarming than poor O liver, curled up in a sad little heap on the step.
　　The n one of the men gave a shout, seized the boy by a leg and pulled him into the hall. 'Here he is! ' he cried excitedly. 'Here's the thief! I shot him last night! '
　　A young lady appeared at the top of the stairs. 'What's going on here
 Quiet, please! Is this poor boy very hurt
 '
　　'Very, 'said the servant, proudly.
　　'The n one of you go to town as fast as you can and fetch a policeman and Dr Losberne. The rest of you, help to carry the boy upstairs and put him to bed. Treat him kindly, I beg you. '



■ 9 O liver starts another life
　　In a comfortable, pleasant sitting－room, the two ladies of the house waited anxiously for the doctor and the police to arrive. The owner of the house, Mrs May lie, was an older woman, but her niece, Rose, was a girl of seventeen, whose quiet beauty and gentle charm won all hearts.
　　As soon as the doctor arrived, he ran breathlessly into the house and burst into the room without knocking. He was clearly a good friend of the ladies.
　　'I never heard of such a dreadful thing! You should both be dead of fright! he said to Mrs May lie. 'In the silence of the night, too! Are you both all right
 Why didn't you send for me at once
 '
　　'We are quite all right, said Rose, smiling. 'But the re's an injured boy upstairs whom aunt wants you to see. '
　　Dr Losberne went up to examine O liver, and was the re for some time He came down looking rather puzzled, and asked the two ladies to see the boy with him.
　　'I can promise you the re's nothing very frightening about him, 'he said.
　　Instead of the evil－looking robber They expected to see, the two ladies found only a pale, thin child, lying peacefully asleep.
　　He looked to innocent that Mrs May lie said, 'This child could never have been in a gang of robbers! '
　　'It certainly seems strange, agreed the doctor, 'but wickedness can hide behind the most gentle face, you know. '
　　'But he's so young, too! ' cried Rose. 'Can you really believe this poor boy is a criminal
 Oh, Dr Losberne, and my dear aunt, I beg you both to have pity on him. '
　　Mrs May lie did not need persuading, and the doctor could not resist Rose's tears. He had, in fact, an extremely kind heart, which he tried to hide behind a quick, fierce manner- though this usually deceived no one.
　　'Well, what's to be done, the n
 ' he said quickly. 'We'll have the police here at any moment, ready to take the boy away and throw him into prison! '
　　Rose begged him to think of a plan, and the doctor thought hard for a few minutes, frowning fiercely. At last he said,
　　'I've got it! ' and rubbed his hand s together in satisfaction.
　　A little later, O liver woke up and was very anxious to tell his story, although he had lost a lot of blood and was very weak. When the doctor and the ladies had heard all about his sad life, They were quite sure that They wanted to save O liver from any unfair punishment. So Dr Losberne went down to the kitchen to talk to the three servants who had surprised Sikes and O liver during the robbery. The doctor folded his arms and gave the men a long, hard stare.
　　'Tell me, ' he began, can you be absolutely sure that the boy upstairs is the same one that was in the house last night
 Well
 '
　　The doctor, usually such a friendly man, seemed so angry that the servants stared at him, open-mouthed. The doctor
　　gave the m no time to think, and went on fiercely,
　　'Three men see a boy for about a second in the dark, in the middle of a lot of smoke and noise. A boy comes to the same house the next day and because one arm is injured, They think he must be the robber. Are you going to swear that this is the same boy
 Well
 What do you say
 ' he finished impatiently.
　　The servants looked at each other in great confusion.
　　Suddenly the re was a ring at the gate; the police officers had finally arrived. Dr Losberne gave orders that plenty of beer should be served before the officers went up to see O liver. He also made sure that the servants had a generous amount of beer, too.
　　When the Officers were finally allowed to see O liver, Dr Losberne said, 'This is a boy who was shot this morning while walking on a farmer's property where he shouldn't have been. The servants saw him and immediately thought he must be the same boy from last night. But now They say They're sure it's not the same boy. '
　　The servants were by now so confused by beer and excitement that They were not sure of anything at all． The robbers had certainly had a boy with the m, They said, but whether this boy was the same boy… well, it seemed very doubtful. The police, too, had drunk quite a lot of beer by now, and before long They were very willing to believe that O liver was not the robber of the night before. They had their own ideas about who committed all the robberies in the area, and O liver was unknown to the m.
　　At last the police left, and O liver was allowed to recover in the kind care of Mrs May lie, Rose, and Dr Losberne. It was several weeks before he was well enough to get out of bed. But the n he quickly grew stronger, and every day told his rescuers how grateful he was. One thing, however, caused him unhappiness. He wanted to find Mr Brown low , the kind old man who had looked after him in London. 'Mr Brown low would be pleased to know how happy I am now, 'he said. So when Dr Losberne offered to take O liver to London to see Mr Brown low , the boy was very pleased.
　　They set out by coach one fine morning, and when They arrived in London, They went straight to Mr Brown low 's house. O liver's heart beat with excitement as They stopped outside. But the house was empty. They were told by the people next door that Mr Brown low had moved to the West Indies six weeks before. O liver was very disappointed; he had thought about Mr Brown low so much recently, and had always hoped to find him again. But now the kind old man had moved abroad, still believing O liver was a lying thief, and he might hold this belief until the day he died.
　　This was a bitter disappointment to O liver, but his new friends were still as kind to him as ever. They left the house in Chertsey and moved to a quiet cottage it the country, taking O liver with the m Spring came, and in the fresh air, away from the noise and smoke and trouble of the city, O liver began a new life. He went for walks with Rose and Mrs May lie, or Rose read to him, and he worked hard at his lessons. He felt as if he had left behind forever the world of crime and hardship and poverty.



■ 10 Life in the country
　　The weeks slipped contentedly past, and spring turned into summer. O liver was now a strong and healthy boy, and very fond of Rose and Mrs May lie as They were of him.
　　One hot summer evening, after a walk in the country, Rose became very weak and pale, and confessed she felt ill. By the next morning she was in a dangerous fever, and Mrs May lie and O liver were afraid she might die. Mrs May lie sent O liver to the nearest town, four miles away, to post two express letters. One was to Dr Losberne in Chertsey, the other to
　　Harry May lie, Mrs May lie's son.
　　O liver, filled with anxiety, ran as fast as he could along the country roads and across the fields until, hot and exhausted, he reached the town. He posted the letters and turned to hurry home again. As he was running past a pub in the main street, he accidentally bumped into a tall man in black coming out. The man stared at O liver. 'What the devil's this
 ' he said, stepping back.
　　'I'm sorry, sir. I was in a hurry, and didn' t see you. '
　　The man murmured angrily to himself, 'Who would have thought it
 Curse him! I can't get away from him! '
　　'I'm sorry, sir, repeated O liver, frightened by the man' s wild, staring eyes.
　　'The devil break your bones! 'the man said through his teeth. 'What are you doing here
 He raised his hand and started towards O liver with a mad look in his eyes, but fell violently to the ground, shaking and gasping, in a fit. People hurried up and helped the man into the pub while O liver, thinking that the man was mad, ran quickly home/
　　Mrs May lie and O liver passed a sleepless night, and Rose grew steadily worse as the fever burned in her．O liver said every prayer he had ever learnt ten times over.
　　Late the next day Dr Losberne and Harry May lie arrived, and the house was full of worried faces and anxious whispers. But the danger passed, and by the next night Dr Losberne was able to announce that, though seriously ill, Rose would not die. O liver cried for joy.
　　A day or two later, Mrs May lie talked privately to her son. Harry was a hand some young man of about twenty-five, with a cheerful, honest face and friendly manners He was clearly very fond of Rose.
　　'I know that you want to marry Rose， Mrs May lie told her son, 'and she is the nicest person I know But I want you to remember one thing－her birth. '
　　'Mother, that means nothing to me, 'said The young man. 'I love her. '
　　'I know you do, Harry, but she herself is well aware of her doubtful birth, and this might affect her answer if you ask her to marry you． I know you have ambitions to enter politics. If you marry a woman with a stain on her name, even though it's not her fault, it might spoil your chances of success in life. Society is cruel, Harry. People might use the knowledge of your wife's doubtful birth against you， and against your children, too. And one day, you might begin to regret your marriage. '
　　'Only a selfish man would do that, Mother! 'Harry answered impatiently. 'No, I am quite determined. I have loved Rose for a long time, and nothing will ever change that. '
　　Mrs May lie sighed. 'And she, I know, is very fond of you. But she herself may try to protect you, and refuse an offer of marriage frpm you, for your sake. Remember that, Harry. But now, I must go back and sit with her. '
　　'Will you tell her how much I've worried about her
 ' asked Harry. 'And how anxious I am to see her again

　　'Of course I will, 'replied Mrs May lie.
　　Some days after this conversation, O liver was sitting in the room where he studied in the evenings. It was a warm night, and he had been studying hard for some hours. He fell asleep at his desk and started dreaming. He dreamt that he was in Fagin's house again, and could see the old man sitting in his corner, whispering to another man. Yes, my dear, he heard Fagin say, 'you're right. That's him. '
　　In O liver's dream the other man answered. 'Of course it is! I told you I'd seen him. I'd recognize him anywhere. If I walked across his unmarked grave, I'd know it was him buried under the ground. '
　　He said this with such hatred that O liver woke up from fear. In front of him, at the open window, so near he could almost touch the m, were Fagin and the strange, wild man he had bumped into outside the pub in the town. In a flash, They were gone. O liver sat still, white with terror, for a second, the n shouted loudly for help.
　　Harry and Dr Losberne came running, and hearing what had happened, They rushed outside into the night and searched the garden and the fields around. The re was no sign of anybody.
　　'It must have been a bad dream, O liver, ' said Harry, breathless after running through the fields. He had heard all about O liver's past from his mother.
　　'No, 'replied O liver, still frightened. 'I saw the m both as plainly as I see you now. '
　　Nothing more was seen or heard of the two men, and after a few days, the event was forgotten. Rose recovered rapidly and was soon able to go outside again. Harry May lie waited a few days, the n, as his mother had expected, he asked Rose to marry him. And as his mother had warned him, Rose refused.
　　'Don't you love me
 ' he asked her, holding her hand .
　　'I do, 'she whispered, ' but please try to forget me. It would ruin your future as a politician if anybody found out about my birth. I could never, never forgive myself. '
　　Harry paused for a few minutes. 'Tell me one thing, dear Rose. Could you have accepted if your past had been different
 Or if I had been poor and friendless, with no hope of riches or success
 '
　　'I could, 'answered Rose, covering her face to hide her tears. 'But as you are, I can never be more than a friend to you.
　　'I shall ask you once more, said Harry softly. 'In a year's time or less, I shall ask you to change your mind. '
　　The girl shook her head and smiled sadly. 'No, it will be useless. '
　　Harry left the next day, having asked O liver to write to him secretly with news of his mother and Rose. From an upstairs window, Rose watched him leave with tears in her eyes.
　　Mr Bumble was now a married man, and not a happy one. He was no longer a beadle but the manager of the workhouse, and his wife, formerly Mrs Corney, scolded and argued with him day and night. One evening, after a particularly violent fight, when she threw things at him and chased him out of the house, he went for a walk alone through the town. He felt very sorry for himself, and finally went into a pub to find comfort in gin－and－water. A tall dark man, sitting in the corner, watched Mr Bumble while he drank. The stranger's clothe s were dusty and muddy, as if he had travelled a long way. Mr Bumble began to feel uncomfortable at the man's hard stare, and tried to avoid meeting his eyes.
　　'I've seen you before, 'the stranger said, eventually. 'you were the beadle here. '
　　'I was. But I don't recognize you. '
　　'It doesn't matter. I came here to look for you, and I'm lucky to have found you. I'd like some information. ' He pushed a couple of coins across the table.
　　'What information
 ' asked Mr Bumble suspiciously, slipping the coins into his pocket.
　　'About a workhouse birth. A boy called O liver Twist. '
　　'Young Twist! I remember him! He was a dreadful—'
　　'It's not him I want to talk about, interrupted the stranger. 'I've heard enough of him. It's the old woman who was the nurse for his mother. Where is she
 '
　　'Oh- she died last winter, 'said Mr Bumble. The n he remembered that his wife had been the re when old Sally had died, and he realized that this information might be worth something. He told the man that one woman had been with the nurse when she died, and had heard some secret from her.
　　'Where can I find this woman
 the stranger asked quickly, showing in his pale face how important this was to him.
　　'I can bring her to meet you tomorrow, 'said Mr Bumble.
　　'All right Down by the river, at nine in the evening. ' The man wrote the address on a piece of paper.
　　'And your name
 asked Mr Bumble.
　　'Monks, replied the stranger, 'but you don't need to remember it. 'The n he quickly left the pub.
　　The next evening was dark and cloudy; a storm threatened and already the first drops of rain were falling. Mr and Mrs Bumble walked up the main street of the town, the n turned towards a group of ruined old houses next to the river. Mr Bumble went first, carrying a dim light, and his wife followed closely behind. At the oldest and most ruined building, They stopped and Mr Bumble took out his piece of paper. The first distant crash of thunder shook the air, and the rain began to pour down heavily. The n They heard Monks calling out of an upstairs window.
　　'Is that the man
 ' Mrs Bumble asked her husband.
　　'Yes. '
　　'The n be careful to say as little as you can. Don't tell him I'm your wife. '
　　Monks opened a small door, saying impatiently, 'Come in! Don't keep me waiting! '
　　Mr Bumble was only brave when dealing with poor, helpless people. He felt very uneasy about entering this dark building with an ill－tempered stranger. However, he was equally afraid of his wife. Nervously, he followed her through the door.
　　Inside, Monks stared at Mrs Bumble for some time. 'So this is the woman, is it
 '
　　'Yes, 'replied Mr Bumble cautiously.
　　As They walked upstairs, the re was a bright flash of lightning outside, followed by loud thunder. They sat dowu at the table and Monks started immediately.
　　'So you were present when the old woman died, is that right
 And she told you something
 He stared at Mrs Bumble again.
　　'Yes, 'said Mrs Bumble. 'Something about the mother of O liver Twist. But first, how much will you pay me for the information
 '
　　'If it's what I want to hear-twenty－five pounds, 'said Monks. 'But it's a lot of money for something which has been lying dead for twelve years. 'Reluctantly, he pushed the money across the table towards her, the n bent forward to listen. The faces of the three nearly touched, as the two men leant over the table to hear what the woman had to say, and the woman leant over towards the m so that They could hear her whisper. In the dim lamplight their faces looked pale and ghostly.
　　'The old woman who was the nurse died with only me in the room, 'said Mrs Bumble.
　　'No one else was the re
 ' asked Monks fiercely.
　　'No one. '
　　'Good, 'said Monks. 'Go on. '
　　'She spoke about a young woman who had given birth in the same bed some years before. The child was O liver Twist. And this nurse had robbed the child's mother. '
　　'Robbed in life
 ' asked Monks.
　　'In death. She stole from the body when it was hardly cold. But the old woman fell back and died before she could tell memore．'
　　'It's a lie！'shouted Monks furiously． 'You know more！I'll kill you both if you don't tell me what else she said．'
　　'She said no more，'repeated Mrs Bumble calmly，showing（unlike Mr Bumble）no fear of the strange man's violence． 'But in her hand I found a piece of dirty paper．'
　　'Which contained…？'
　　'Nothing．It was only a receipt from a pawnbroker．I went to the pawnbroker and got back a little gold locket．Inside was a gold wedding ring and on the locket itself，the name
　　“Agnes”．'She put the locket on the table in front of Monks．
　　He picked it up immediately and looked at it closely，his hand s shaking． 'Is this all？'
　　'It is．And now I want to ask you a question．What do youintend to do with the locket？'
　　'This．So it can never be used against me．'Monks suddenly pushed the table to one side and opened a small door in the floor．Down below rushed the river，its muddy waters swollen by the heavy rain．
　　'If you threw a man's body down the re，where would it be to morrow？'asked Monks．
　　'Twelve miles down the river，and cut to pieces，'replied Mr Bumble in a shaky voice．
　　Monks tied the locket to a heavy weight and dropped it in to the water．In a second，it was gone．The three of the m lookedinto each other's faces，and seemed to breathe more freely．
　　'Now we have nothing more to say，'said Monks，with athreatening look at Mr Bumble． 'And nothing to say to any one else either．Do you understand？'
　　'Certainly，'said Mr Bumble，very politely．He move da way from the strange man，anxious to leave quickly．
　　At the door to the street，Monks turned again to Mr Bumble． 'And if we ever meet again，we don't know each other．Do you understand that as well？'
　　'Perfectly，'said the relieved Mr Bumble，moving away into the rain and pulling his wife with him．



■ 11 Nancy makes a visit
　　On the evening after the Bumbles' little business meeting，Mr Bill Sikes，waking from a sleep，called out to ask the time．
　　The room he was lying in was very small and dirty．It was a different room from the one he had occupied before the Chertsey expedition，but it was in the same poor part of London．The re were so few possessions or comforts in the room that it was clear Mr Sikes had met hard times．He himself was thin and pale from illness，and was lying on the bed，wrapped in an old coat．The white dog lay on the floor next to him．
　　Seated by the window was Nancy，repairing Sikes' old jacket．She，too，was thin and pale．At Sikes' voice she raised her head from her work． 'Not long past seven，'she said． 'How do you feel now，Bill？'
　　'As weak as water．Help me get up，will you？'
　　As Nancy helped him out of bed，Sikes swore and cursed a ther clumsiness．Illness had not improved his temper．
　　'You would n't speak like that if you knew how kindly I've nursed you the se last few days，'said Nancy． 'So many nights，I've looked after you．'She sat down in a chair，exhausted．
　　'Get up！'shouted Sikes． 'What's wrong with you？'
　　But Nancy was unable to get up．Her head fell back against the chair and she fainted．
　　Sikes swore and cursed again，but Nancy remained unconscious．
　　'What's the matter here？'asked a voice from the door，and Fagin，followed by the Artful Dodger and Charley Bates，entered the room．When They saw Nancy，They hurried to help her．Charley rubbed her hand s and the Dodger gave her a drink from the bottle he carried．Gradually，Nancy recovered her senses．
　　Sikes the n turned to Fagin． 'What are you here for？'he asked roughly． 'You haven't been here for weeks-all the time I was ill．I haven't two coins to rub together．Why didn't you help me？You treat me worse than a dog！'
　　'Don't be bad-tempered，my dear，'said Fagin calmly． 'I haven't forgotten you，Bill．'
　　'Well，what about some money，the n？I've done enough work for you recently-what about some money？'
　　'I haven't a single coin with me，my dear，'said Fagin．
　　'The n go and get some-you've got lots at home．No，I don't trust you．Nancy can go back with you to your house and fetch some money．I'll stay here and sleep．'
　　After a good deal of arguing，Fagin managed to reduce the amount Sikes was demanding from five pounds to three pounds．He went back to his house with Nancy and the boys．
　　When They were inside，Fagin told the girl， 'I'll just goupstairs and fetch the cash for Bill，my dear．The re's little money in this business，Nancy，little money and no thanks- but I'm fond of seeing The young people around me．'
　　Suddenly the re was a man's voice at the front door．As soon as Nancy heard it，she sat up in her chair．
　　'That's the man I was expecting earlier，'said Fagin． 'Don't worry．He'll only be ten minutes．'
　　The man entered the room．It was Monks．When he saw Nancy，he moved back，as if he had expected no one but Fagin．
　　'It's all right，only one of my young people，'Fagin said to him． 'Did you see him？'
　　'Yes，'answered Monks．
　　'Any news？'
　　'Good news，'said Monks with a smile． 'Let me have a word with you．'He and Fagin went upstairs to talk privately．
　　As soon as They had left the room，Nancy took off her shoes and crept silently up the stairs to listen in the passage-as she had done once before．She was gone for a quarter of an hour，the n，like a ghost，she reappeared in the downstairs room and sat down．Immediately afterwards，the two men descended the stairs．
　　'How pale you are，Nancy！'said Fagin，once Monks had left the house． 'What have you been doing to yourself？'
　　'Nothing-except waiting here for you too long，'she answered，turning her face away from him． 'Now，where's the money for Bill？'
　　With a sigh for every piece of money，Fagin put the agreed amount into her hand ．
　　When Nancy was out in the street again，she sat down on a door step，and for a few minutes seemed unable to move．The n she started running wildly through the streets，and when she was exhausted she stopped and burst into tears．This strange mood seemed to leave her the n，and she turned and hurried back to Sikes' house．
　　At first when she returned，Sikes noticed nothing unusual about her．Fagin，with his sharp，suspicious eyes，would have noticed something at once．But as night came，the girl's nervous excitement increased and even Sikes was alarmed by the paleness in her cheeks and the fire in her eye．
　　He lay in bed，drinking hot gin-and-water，and staring at her． 'You look like a corpse that's come back to life again．What's the matter with you tonight？'
　　'Nothing．Why are you staring at me so hard？'
　　'Either you've caught the fever yourself，or-no，you're not going to…you wouldn't do that！'
　　'Do what？'asked the girl．
　　'The re's not a girl alive as loyal as you．If you weren't， I'd have cut your throat months ago．No，you must have the fever coming on，that's it．Now，give me some of my medicine．'
　　Nancy quickly poured out his medicine with her back to him．He took it，and after turning restlessly for some time，heeventually fell into a deep，heavy sleep．
　　'The drug's taken effect at last，'Nancy said to herself as she rose from her position beside the bed． 'I hope I'm not too late．'
　　Quickly，she put on her coat and hat，looking round fearfully as if she expected at any moment to feel Sikes' heavy hand on her shoulder．She kissed the robber's lips softly，then ran from the house without a sound．
　　She hurried in the direction of west London，pushing past people on the pavement，and running across crowded streets with out looking．
　　'The woman is mad！'said the people，turning to look ather as she rushed past the m．
　　She came to a wealthier part of the town where the street swere quieter，and before long she had reached her destination．It was a family hotel in a quiet street near Hyde Park．The clock struck eleven as she entered．
　　The man at the desk looked at her and asked， 'What do you want here？'
　　'I want to see Miss May lie．'
　　The man looked at The young woman with strong disapproval． 'She won't want to see someone like you．Come on，get out．'
　　'Let me see her-or two of you will have to throw me out！'said Nancy violently．
　　The man looked at her again，and decided it would be easierto do as she asked．He led her upstairs to Rose's room．
　　Nancy entered with a brave face but with fear in her heart．
　　'Please sit down and tell me why you wish to see me，'said Rose May lie，looking with some surprise at this poor，rough girl from the streets．Rose's manner was so kind and sincere，and so unexpected，that Nancy burst into tears．
　　When she had recovered a little，she asked， 'Is the door shut？'
　　'Yes，'answered Rose，a little nervously． 'But why？'
　　'Because I am about to put my life，and the lives of others，in your hand s．I am the girl that kidnapped little O liver and took him back to old Fagin's house on the night O liver was going to the bookseller．'
　　'You！'said Rose．
　　'Yes，it was me．I am that wicked creature you have hear dab out．I've no friends except thieves and robbers．I've lived on the streets since I was a child，cold，hungry，among people who are always drunk and fighting．And that's where I'll die，too．'
　　'I pity you！'said Rose in a broken voice．
　　'But I'll tell you why I'm here．Do you know a man called Monks？'
　　'No，'answered Rose．
　　'He knows you．I heard him tell Fagin that you were at this hotel．Maybe he's changed his name．Soon after O liver was put into your house on the night of the robbery，I listened insecret to a conversation between Monks and Fagin in the dark．And I heard Monks say that he'd seen O liver in the street，and that he knew at once O liver was the child he was looking for，although I couldn't hear why．Monks the n agreed to pay Fagin some money if he could find O liver again，and more money if he could turn the poor boy into a thief．'
　　'Why？'asked Rose．
　　'He saw my shadow on the wall as I listened，and I had to escape．I didn't see him again until last night．'
　　'And what happened the n？'
　　'I listened at the door again．And I heard Monks say this：“So the only proof of the boy's identity is at the bottom of the river，and the old woman who received it is dead．”He and Fagin laughed．The n Monks said that he had all O liver' s money safely now，but how funny it would be if the boy went to prison for stealing，after his father's unfair will．'
　　'What is all this？'asked Rose．
　　'It's the truth，lady．The n Monks said he couldn't have O liver killed because suspicion would point to himself．Bu the 'd try for the rest of his life to harm the boy if he could．The n Monks laughed again about the money O liver should have got from his father's will．“My young brother O liver will n ever see that money！”he said．'
　　'His brother！'exclaimed Rose．
　　'Those were his words，'said Nancy，looking round uneasily，as if she still expected to see Sikes． 'And the n hetalked about how amazed you would be if you knew who
　　O liver really was．
　　'And this man was serious？'
　　'His voice was full of anger and hatred．I know many people who do worse things，but I'd rather listen to all of the m than to this man Monks．But I must get back now，or people will wonder where I've been．'
　　'Back！How can you go back to such a life？'asked Rose． 'You've told me all this．Now I can help you by letting you stay somewhere safe．'
　　'No．Perhaps it's hard for you to believe，but the re's one man，the most dangerous of the m all，that I can never leave．You're the first person who's ever spoken to me so kindly-but it's too late．'
　　'It's never too late！'
　　'It is！'cried the girl． 'I can't leave him now．And if I tell anyone about this man，he'll die．'
　　'But how can I find you again，when we want to investigate this mystery further？'
　　'I'll meet you secretly，if you promise not to watch or follow me，'said Nancy． 'And if you promise just one more thing-not to do anything to hurt the man I can never leave．'
　　'I promise．'
　　'Every Sunday night，between eleven and twelve，I will walk on London Bridge if I am alive．Meet me the re if youwant more information．'
　　As Nancy said the se words，she left the room and ran down the stairs and out into the street once more．Rose was left alone，her thoughts in great confusion，as she wondered desperately what to do and who to ask for advice．
　　The next morning，O liver，who had been out walking，ranin to Rose's room at the hotel．He was breathless with excitement．
　　'I can't believe what I've seen！Now you'll all know that I've told you the truth！'he shouted．
　　'I know you've always told us the truth-but what are you talking about？'asked Rose．
　　I've seen Mr Brown low ，the kind man who was so good tome．
　　'Where？'
　　'Going into a house，'said O liver，crying with joy． 'I've got the address here．'
　　'Quick，'said Rose． 'Call a coach．I'll take you there immediately．'
　　The idea came to Rose that perhaps Mr Brown low would advise her．She had been afraid to tell Nancy's story to Dr Losberne，since the good doctor was very excitable and often acted with more enthusiasm than wisdom．
　　In less than five minutes They were in the coach on their way to the address．Rose went in first to talk to Mr Brown low alone．She was taken into his study，and polite greetings were exchanged．When They were seated again，Rose said，
　　'This will surprose you very much，but you were once very kind to a dear friend of mine，and I'm sure you will be interested to hear news of him．'
　　'Really？May I ask you his name？'
　　'O liver Twist．'
　　Mr Brown low said nothing for a few seconds，but simply stared at Rose．Finally he moved his chair nearer to her and said with great feeling， 'I once thought that he was a liar and a thief．If you have evidence to show me I was wrong，please tell me at once．'
　　'I know him to be a child with a warm heart，'said Rose．
　　'And despite the hardships of his life，he's a better person than almost anyone I know．'
　　'I looked for him everywhere，'said Mr Brown low ， 'but I could never find him．I could never quite believe that he really did intend to rob me．'
　　Rose told him everything that had happened to O liver since the n．She finished by saying， 'And his only sorrow，for some months，has been that he could not find you，his former friend．'
　　'Thank God！'said Mr Brown low ． 'This is great happiness to me，great happiness．But why haven't you brought him with you，Miss May lie？'
　　'He's waiting in a coach at the door，'replied Rose．
　　Mr Brown low hurried out of the room，down the stairs and into the coach without another word．In a minute he had returned with O liver． 'How well he looks！'he said． 'New clothe s，the same sweet face，but not so pale；the same eyes，but not so sad．'
　　They talked with great joy for some time．The n Mr Brown low sent for Mrs Bed win，the old housekeeper．She came in quietly and waited for her orders．
　　'You get blinder every day，'said Mr Brown low impatiently．
　　'People's eyes，at my time of life，don't improve with age，'replied the old lady．
　　'The n put on your glasses．'
　　As she searched for the m in her pocket，O liver could not wait any longer and ran into her arms．
　　'Dear God！'she said． 'It's my innocent boy！'
　　'My dear old nurse！'cried O liver．
　　'I knew he would come back，'said the old lady，holding him in her arms． 'How well he's dressed-how well he looks again！'She laughed and cried at the same time，and could not let O liver go．
　　While O liver talked to Mrs Bed win，Rose asked Mr Brown low if she could speak to him privately．He led her in to another room，and the re listened，with a good deal of amaze ment，to Rose's account of her extraordinary conversation with Nancy．Between the m，They decided that Mrs May lie and Dr Losberne should be told，and that Mr Brown low would come to the hotel that evening for a discussion．For the moment，nothing would be said to O liver himself．
　　That evening at the hotel O liver's four friends met as arranged．Dr Losberne，of course，was full of immediate plans to rush round London arresting all the gang and hanging the mat once．Mr Brown low ，fortunately，was able to persuade him to abandon this wild idea．
　　'The n what's to be done？'cried the doctor impatiently．
　　'First，'said Mr Brown low calmly， 'we must discover who he inheritance that should have been his．'
　　'Yes，yes，'said the doctor，nodding in agreement． 'But how shall we achieve the se aims？'
　　'We must find this man Monks，'said Mr Brown low ． 'Nancy will not betray the man who is special to her，but she will surely agree to tell us how or where to find Monks．Then we must find a way to force Monks to talk．We must be both cautious and clever．After all，we have no proof against him，and if we cannot make him talk，this mystery will never be solved．But we'll have to wait five days until Sunday before we can meet Nancy on London Bridge．Until the n，we can do nothing．'



■ 12 Nancy keeps an appointment
　　On exactly the same night as Nancy had met Rose May lie，two people from O liver's home town were making their way towards London．Their progress was slow，since they travelled on foot，and in addition，the girl was carrying a heavy bag on her back．The young man carried nothing．From time to time he turned to shout at the girl behind him． 'Hurry up！What a lazy creature you are，Charlotte！I'll come and give you a kick if you don't move faster！'
　　The young man was Noah Claypole，who had made O liver's life so miserable at Mr Sowerberry's house．He was now taller and uglier but otherwise little changed．He and Charlotte had grown tired of the undertaking business and had set off to London to start a new life-with all the money from Mr So wer berry's shop in their pockets．
　　Eventually，They entered London，and Noah began to look for a quiet，cheap pub where They could spend the night．Charlotte followed obediently at his heels as They walked through a district of narrow，dirty streets．
　　At last Noah found a pub that he thought was suitable．It was dark and dirty，with a few rough-looking men in the bar．They entered and asked for a room for the night and a meal of cold meat and beer，which They ate in the bar．The beer madeNoah talkative and he began to boast． 'So it's no more coffins for us，my girl．We can do better than just robbing Mr So wer berry．In London the re are pockets，houses，coaches-even banks！'
　　'I like the sound of it，Noah，but how are we going to do all this？'asked Charlotte．
　　'We can meet people who know about the se things．I'd like to be the leader of some gang，if the re's a good profit to be made in that kind of work．'Noah felt very pleased with himself，and looked forward to an easy life of crime in the capital．
　　They talked about their plans for a few minutes．The n astranger，who had been sitting unseen round the corner，cameup to the m．The stranger was Fagin．He greeted the m in avery friendly and cheerful way，sat down with the m，and immediately ordered more beer for Noah．
　　'That's good beer，'said Noah，already a little drunk．He thanked the stranger for the drink．
　　'Expensive，too，'said Fagin． 'If you drink that everyday，my dear，you'll need to empty pockets，houses，coaches，even banks．'
　　When he heard his own words repeated，Noah went pale with terror．The stranger must have heard everything，even how They had robbed Mr So wer berry！
　　'Don't worry，'laughed Fagin，pulling his chair closer． 'You're lucky it was only me who heard you．'
　　'I didn't take it，'said Noah quickly． 'It was the woman who did it！'
　　'It does n't matter who did it，my dear，replied Fagin，looking quickly at Charlotte． 'Because I'm in that business myself．And the people in my house as well．I can in trod uce you to the right people，if you're interested．You both look like good workers．'
　　Charlotte and Noah felt a mixture of fear and pleasure． 'What would you want me to do？'asked Noah． 'Some thing light，if possible，'he added．
　　'What about spying on people？'asked Fagin． 'Or robbing young children who are going shopping for their mothers？That's light work，and easy．'
　　Noah laughed． 'That sounds like just the thing for me！And what will I earn for this work？'
　　'You can live free in my house，and give me half of what you earn．
　　After fur the r discussion，and the transfer of Mr So wer berry's money from Noah's pocket to Fagin's，agreement was reached．The next day Noah and Charlotte went to live in Fagin's house and began to be instructed in their new profession．
　　Although training and experience had made Nancy an exper tliar，she could not completely hide the fear in her mind．She knew she had taken an enormous risk in going to see RoseMay lie．If Fagin or Sikes ever found out…But she pushed the se fears away．She was determined to keep her promise to Rose May lie，and meet her as arranged．
　　On the first Sunday night after her meeting with Rose，she was in Sikes' room when the clock struck eleven．Fagin was the re，too，discussing some business with Sikes．Nancy stood up and put on her coat．Sikes watched her，surprised．
　　'Nancy！Where are you going at this time of night？'
　　'Not far．'
　　'What kind of answer is that？Where are you going？'
　　'I don't know，'replied the girl．
　　'The n I do．Nowhere．Sit down．'
　　'I'm not well．I want a breath of air．'
　　Sikes got up and locked the door．
　　'Let me go！'said the girl with great force． 'Just for one hour-let me go！'
　　Sikes seized her arms roughly． 'The girl's gone mad！'
　　Nancy fought wildly，and Sikes had to hold her down in a chair．She continued to scream and fight until midnight，when，exhausted and tearful，she stopped struggling．She went into another room and threw herself on a bed．
　　'She's a strange girl，'Sikes said to Fagin，shaking his head． 'Why did she suddenly decide to go out tonight？It hought that after all the se years I'd finally tamed her．She must be ill-perhaps she's still got a bit of fever．'
　　'That must be it，'said Fagin，nodding thoughtfully．
　　As he walked home，Fagin's eyes were sharp with suspicion．He had suspected for a while that Nancy had become tired of Bill Sikes' brutality and violence，and that she had found a new friend to take his place．Her manner was different；she often left home alone，and she seemed lessinterested in the gang．And tonight，her desperate impatience to go out at a particular hour…He was certain he was right．He began to make plans．
　　First，he wanted to know who Nancy's new friend was．He could make him a valuable new member of the gang，with Nancy as his assistant．But the re was another，darker reason．Fagin，too，had become tired of Sikes．Sikes knew too much-too many dangerous secrets about Fagin himself．Fagin distrusted everybody，but he hated and distrusted Sikes most of all．It would be very convenient if Sikes could be…removed．
　　'With a little persuasion，'Fagin thought， 'perhaps the girl would poison Sikes．'Suddenly，his eyes narrowed in delight． 'Yes！First，I must have her watched，and find out who her new man is．The n I shall threaten to tell Sikes everything．She knows that neither she nor her new man will ever be safe from Sikes' violent jealousy．She will have no choice except to do as I ask her-and the n，once the murder is done，she will be in my power for ever！'
　　Early next morning Fagin called the newest member of his gang．Noah was doing very well．He had already broughthome quite a lot of money．He had found that robbing small children was indeed light，easy work，and he was proud of his success．
　　'I have another job for you now，'Fagin told him． 'It needs great care and secrecy．I want you to follow a woman．I want to know where she goes，who she sees，and if possible，what she says．I will pay you a pound for this information．'
　　Noah's eyes were wide with greed． 'I'm the right man forthis job．Who is she？'
　　'One of us．'
　　'What？You don't trust her，the n？'
　　'Exactly so，my dear．Exactly so，'smiled Fagin．The following Sunday，soon after eleven o'clock，a woman walked quickly through the dark streets towards Lond on Bridge．A mist hung over the river，and the buildings on the far bank could hardly be seen．A man followed some distance behind her，keeping to the darkest shadows．It was a cold，damp night，and the re were very few people on the streets at this late hour．
　　When the woman reached the centre of the bridge，she stopped and looked around anxiously．The man following hers topped too．The heavy bell of St Paul's cathe dral rang out，announcing the death of another day．Just as it finished，agrey haired man and a young woman got out of a coach and walked across the bridge．They met the woman，who tookthe m down some steps leading to the river bank．They stood indeep shadow by the wall of the bridge．The man hurried down some other steps，crept up to the corner of the wall，and listened．
　　Nancy spoke first． 'I'm so frightened tonight I can hardly breathe ．'
　　'Frightened of what？'asked Mr Brown low ．He seemed topity her．
　　'I wish I knew．Horrible thoughts of death，and blood，have been with me all day．I don't know why．'
　　'Speak to her kindly，'said Rose to Mr Brown low ． 'Poorgirl！She seems to need it．'
　　'I could n't come last Sunday，'continued the girl． 'I was kept in by force．But tonight he'll be out all night untilday light．Now，before I tell rou anything else，I must tell you that I don't want Fagin，or any of the other members of the gang，to be hand ed to the police．'
　　'Why not？'
　　'Because I couldn't betray the m．They've been loyal to me，and I'll stay loyal to the m．'
　　'The n just tell us how we can get Monks，and I promisen one of your friends will be harmed，'said Mr Brown low ．
　　'And Monks will never know how you found out about him？'she asked．
　　'We promise，'said Rose gently．
　　Nancy the n told the m，in so low a voice that the listenerround the corner could hardly hear her，where Monks often went for a drink，and what he looked like．She finished by saying， 'On his throat，high up，the re is—'
　　'A bright red mark？'asked Mr Brown low ．
　　'Do you know him？'asked Nancy in surprise．
　　'I think I do．'Mr Brown low murmured to himself， 'It must be him！'The n more loudly，he said to Nancy， 'Thank you for everything you've told us．But now-how can you go back to the se people？Come with us now，tonight．We canarr ange for you to be hidden from the m all forever，if you want us to．'
　　The girl shook her head． 'I'm chained to him，bad as Theyare．I've gone too far to change my life now．'She looked nervously over her shoulder． 'I can feel those dreadful terrors again-visions of blood and death．I must go home．'
　　Mr Brown low and Rose could not persuade her to change her mind Sadly，They turned to leave，and when They had gone，Nancy fell to the ground in a storm of tears．Meanwhile，Noah Claypole，amazed by all that he had heard，crept up the steps and ran for Fagin's house as fast as his legs could carry him．Some hours later，nearly two hours before dawn，Noah laya sleep in Fagin's house．But Fagin sat silently by a dead fire，staring at the flame of a candle on tne table beside him．With his pale，wrinkled face and his red，staring eyes，he looked like a devil out of hell．Hatred ran like poison through hisevery thought．Hatred for the girl who had dared to talk to strangers，who had ruined his plan to get rid of Sikes．He did not believe her promise not to betray him，and he feared that he would now be caught，and hung．
　　Just before dawn Sikes entered the room，carrying a bundle which contained the results of his night's work．Fagin took what Sikes gave him，the n stared at the robber for a long time with out speaking．
　　'Why are you looking at me like that？'asked Sikes，uneasy at the old man's strange expression．
　　Fagin raised his hand ，but his passion was so great that hecould not speak．
　　'Say something，will you！'shouted Sikes，placing his huge hand on Fagin's collar and shaking him in his anger and fear．
　　'Open your mouth and say what you've got to say！'
　　Eventually Fagin found his voice． 'Bill，what would you do if one of the gang went out at night and told someone all about us，and what we'd done？What would you do to him？'
　　'I'd smash his head into little pieces，'said the robber，swearing violently．
　　'And what if it was me，who knows so much about all ofus，and could put us all in prison and get us all hanged？'whispered Fagin，his eyes flashing with hate．
　　'I'd beat your brains out in public．Even in the law-court，I'd run over and kill you with my bare hand s，'said Sikes，showing his teeth in his anger． 'I don't care who it was，that's what I'd do．'
　　Fagin woke Noah． 'Tell Bill what you told me，what you saw，what she did．Tell him！'
　　Noah rubbed the sleep from his eyes and told Sikes every thing His face white with passion，Sikes listened to the end，the n，swearing furioustly，he rushed from the room and down the stairs．
　　'Bill！'Fagin called after him． 'You won't be…too violent？'
　　Sikes made no reply，but，pulling open the door，ran out into the silent streets．He did not turn his head to right or left，but looked straight in front of him with wild determination．He ran at great speed，his eyes on fire，his teeth tight together，and did not pause until he reached his own door．He ran up to his room，entered and locked the door，put a table against it，the n woke Nancy．
　　'Bill！'she said，pleased to see him．But when she saw his expression，the colour went out of her face． 'What's the matter？'she said in alarm．
　　'You know what．'Sikes took out his gun，but realizing，even in his madness，that a shot might be heard，he beat her twice across the face with it as hard as he could．She fell，with low cry of pain and terror，almost blinded by the blood that flowed from the cut on her forehead．The murderer staggered to a corner，seized a heavy stick and struck her down．



■ 13 The end of the gang
　　The sun burst upon the crowded city in all its brightness．It lit up every corner of London，the great houses of the rich，and the miserable homes of the poor．Its hone everywhere，even into the room where the murdered woman lay．The horror of that scene was even more dreadful in the clear morning light．
　　Sikes sat the re，unable to move，looking at the body．He had thrown the blood-covered stick into the fire，the n washed himself and his clothe s．He had cut out the bits of his clothes that were stained and burnt the m too，but the re were still bloodstains all over the floor．Even the dog's feet were bloody．
　　Finally，he forced himself to leave the room，pulling the dog out with him and locking the door behind him．He walked rapidly north，towards High gate，the n on to Hampstead．On the open land of Hampstead Heath，away from people and houses，he found a place in a field where he could sleep with out being disturbed．
　　But before long he was up again and running．This time heran back towards London for a while．The n he turned and went north again，sometimes walking，sometimes running，with no clear purpose in his mind．Eventually，he felt hungry，and changed direction towards Hendon，a quiet place away from the crowds，where he could buy food．But even the children and chickens the re seemed to look at him with suspicion．So he turned back towards Hampstead Heath again，without having eaten，uncertain where to go．
　　At last he turned north again，his dog still running at his heels，and set off to a village just outside London．He stopped at a small，quiet pub and bought a meal，the n went on again．It was now dark and as he continued walking，he felt as if Nancy were following him，her shadow on the road，her last low cry in the wind．If he stopped，the ghostly figure did the same．If he ran，it ran too，moving stiffly，like a corpse．Sometimes he turned，determined to drive the ghost away，but his blood ran cold with terror．Every time he turned，the ghost turned too，and was still behind him．
　　Finally，he found another field where he could hide．He lay down，unable to sleep，his mind filled with visions of the dead girl．Her wide，dead eyes stared at him，watching him through a curtain of blood．
　　Suddenly he heard shouting in the distance．He jumped to his feet and saw that the sky seemed on fire．Sheets of flame shot into the air，driving clouds of smoke in his direction．He heard an alarm bell，and more shouts of 'Fire！'Running with his dog across the fields，he joined the crowds of men and women fighting the fire．He could forget his own terror in this new danger，and he worked all night with the crowd，shouting，running and working togethe r to stop the flames destroying more buildings．
　　In the morning the mad excitement was over，and the dreadful memory of his crime returned-more terrifying than ever．In desperation，he decided to go back to London．
　　'At least the re'll be somebody I can speak to，'he thought to himself． 'And it's a better hiding-place than out here in the country．I'll hide the re for a week，get some money out of Fagin，the n escape to France．'
　　Suddenly he remembered the dog-people would be looking for his dog as well as himself．He decided to drown the animal．But the dog smelt the man's fear，and turned and ran away from him faster than it had ever run in its life． 'You have a choice，Mr Monks，'said Mr Brown low ． 'You have been kidnapped and brought here to my house．You can either tell me what I want to know，or I'll have you arrested，instantly，for fraud and robbery．It's your choice．And you must decide now．At once．'
　　Monks hesitated and looked at the old man，but Mr Brown low 's expression was so serious and determined that The younger man realized it was pointless to protest． 'I didn't expect this treatment from my father's oldest friend，'said Monks angrily，sitting down with a frown on his face．
　　'Yes，I was your father's oldest friend，'said Mr Brown low ． 'And I know all about you-how your father，while still a boy，was forced by his family into an unhappy marriage with an older woman，and how you were the result of that marriage．I also know that your parents separated，hating each other by the end．'
　　'Well-what's so important about that？'
　　'When They'd been separated for ten years，'said Mr Brown low ， 'your father met another family．The re were two daughters，one nineteen years old and the other only two or three．Your father became engaged to the older daughter．At this point one of his rich relations died and left him a lot of money in his will．Your father had to travel to Italy to receive his inheritance，and while the re，he became ill and died．Your mother，who was living with you in Paris，immediately rushed to Italy when she heard the news．As your father had made no will of his own，all the relation's money came to you and her．'
　　Monks listened with close attention，biting his lip and staring at the floor．
　　'Before your father went to receive that money，he came to see me，'continued Mr Brown low slowly，his eyes fixed on Monks'face．
　　'I never heard that before，'said Monks，looking up suddenly，a suspicious expression on his face．
　　'He left me a picture of the poor girl he wanted to marry．He talked wildly about shame and guilt，and how he would give part of the money he'd inherited to his wife and to you，and use the rest to escape from England with the girl he loved．He refused to tell me any more details．'
　　Monks breathe d more easily，and even smiled．
　　'But，'said Mr Brown low ，pulling his chair nearer to the other man， 'by chance I was able to rescue your brother O liver from a life of misery and—'
　　'What！'cried Monks．
　　Mr Brown low continued without a pause． 'And when he was recovering from his sickness here in my house，I noticed how similar he looked to the girl's face in the picture．But he was taken away before I could discover his history-as you know very well．'
　　'You can't prove anything！'said Monks．
　　'I can．I heard that you were in the West Indies．I went the re to try and find you to see if you knew anything about O liver，but you'd already left．I returned to London，and was unable to find you until two hours ago．'
　　'And now what？You can't prove that O liver's my brother．'Monks smiled unpleasantly．
　　'I couldn't before，'said Mr Brown low ，standing up． 'But now I can．The re was a will，but your mother destroyed it．This will mentioned a child that would be born later；this was O liver，the child you met later by accident．You noticed his resemblance to your father and you became suspicious．You the n went back to his birthplace，found proof of his birth and the fact that he's your half-brother，and destroyed that proof．'
　　Monks sat in silence，his eyes filled with fear．
　　'Yes，'continued Mr Brown low fiercely， 'shadows on the wall have caught your whispers with Fagin，and brought the m to my ear．For the sake of that innocent child，whom you wanted to destroy．And now murder had been done，and you are as guilty of that as if you had struck the blow yourself！'
　　'No，no，'said Monks quickly． 'I knew nothing of that．Nothing at all．'He was silent for a while，realizing how much was known about him．Hatred and fear fought inside him，but he was a coward at heart．At last，seeing no escape，he raised his head． 'I will admit everything-in front of witnesses，if necessary．'
　　Mr Brown low nodded coldly． 'I will prepare a document for you to sign．You must give O liver what is really his，and the n you can go where you please．'
　　At that moment Dr Losberne rushed into the room． 'The murderer will be taken tonight！His dog's been found．'
　　'And Fagin？'asked Mr Brown low ．
　　'They're sure of him．They may have him already．'
　　Mr Brown low turned back to Monks． 'Have you made up your mind？'
　　'Yes，'replied Monks． 'And you promise-it'll remain a secret？No police，or charges of fraud against me？'
　　'Yes，'said Mr Brown low ． 'You have my promise．For now，you must remain here，locked in this room．I will come for you tomorrow evening and take you to sign a confession in front of witnesses．'
　　Mr Brown low the n left the room with the doctor，and They eagerly discussed the news of the hunt for the criminals． 'My blood boils with anger，'said Mr Brown low ． 'This poor murdered girl must be revenged．You stay here and guard Monks．I'll go out and get the latest news．'
　　The two men parted，each in a fever of excitement．Down by the river Thames was a district called Rotherhithe ，one of the dirtiest and roughest places in London．The houses next to the river had no owners；They were broken down and ruined，but could be defended against attack．In an upper room of one of the se houses，were three members of Fagin's gang．
　　'When was Fagin taken，the n？'asked the man called Toby．
　　'Two o'clock this afternoon．Charley and I escaped up the chimney，but Noah was caught．Bet went to see Nancy and when she saw the body，she started screaming and wouldn't stop．She's been taken to hospital．'
　　'What's happened to Charley Bates？'
　　'He'll come here when it's dark．It's too dangerous now．'
　　'We're in trouble，'said Toby． 'Fagin's going to hang-that's certain．'
　　'You should have seen him when he was caught，'said another robber． 'The police carried him through the crowd while all the people jumped at him，screaming and trying to attack him．'
　　Suddenly Sikes' dog ran into the room．All the robbers rushed out immediately to look for Sikes，but the re was no sign of him．They returned to the upstairs room．
　　'I hope he's not coming here，'said Toby．
　　'The dog's come a long way，'said another man． 'Covered in mud，and tired out．'
　　They sat the re in silence，wondering where Sikes was．It was already dark when They heard a sudden，hurried knock at the door downstairs．
　　Toby went to the window to look down，the n pulled his head back in，his face pale with fear．The re was no need to tell tlec others who it was．
　　'We must let him in，'said Toby，although none of the m wanted to see him．Toby went down to the door and returned，followed by sikes．White-faced，with a three-day-old beard，hollow cheeks and staring eyes，Sikes looked like a ghost．No one said a word．
　　'Nothing to say to me？'Sikes asked．
　　The only answer was a low shout of many voices from outside in the distance，coming closer．Lights appeared．Looking out，Sikes saw a stream of people crossing the bridge towards the m．The n the re was a loud knocking on the door and more shouts from the crowd．
　　'The doors are made of metal and They're locked and chained，'said Toby．The three robbers watched Sikes nervously，as if he were a wild animal．
　　'Bring a ladder！'shouted some of the crowd below．
　　'Give me a rope，quick，'Sikes said to the others． 'I'll go the other way，climb down the back and escape over the river．Get me a rope-now！Or I'll do three more murders！'
　　A minute later，Sikes appeared on the roof and the shouts from the crowd below swelled to a great roar．The n the front door was smashed down and people streamed into the house．Sikes quickly tied the rope around the chimney，the n began to tie the other end around himself，ready to lower himself to the ground behind the house．But just as he put the rope over his head，he screamed in terror and threw his arms above his head．He staggered back，slipped and fell over the edge of the roof．As he fell，the rope tightened around his neck with a horrible jerk．In a second the murderer was dead，and the re he hung，his body swinging gently from side to side．The dog，which had followed its master onto the roof，jumped down towards the lifeless body，missed，and fell dead on the stones below．



■ 14 The end of the mystery
　　The next day O liver travelled with Mr Brown low ，Dr Losberne，Mrs May lie and Rose back to his birthplace．He had been told a little of his history，and knew that the re would be more explanations at the end of this journey．He was anxious and uncertain，wondering what he would hear．
　　But towards the end of the journey，he began to recognize familiar places，and in great excitement pointed the m out to Rose．The re was the path he had taken when he had run away．The re，across the fields，was the 'baby farm'．The n，as They drove into the town，he saw the house of Mr So wer berry the undertaker，and the workhouse that had been his prison．
　　They stopped at the biggest hotel in the town，and went in to their rooms．During dinner Mr Brown low stayed in a separate room，and the older members of the group went in and out with serious faces．Mrs May lie came back with her eyes red from crying．All this made Rose and O liver，who had not been told any new secrets，very nervous and uncomfortable．
　　At nine o'clock Dr Losberne and Mr Brown low brought Monks into the room．O liver was very surprised；this was the same man he had bumped into once outside a pub，and seen another time with Fagin，looking in at him through the window of the country cottage．O liver was told that Monks was his half-brother，and the boy stared at him in shock and amazement．Monks looked back at him with hatred．
　　'We have the whole story here in the se papers，'said Mr Brown low ，putting the m on the table． 'All we need now is for you to sign the m，Monks．And to tell O liver what happened．'
　　Monks started hesitantly． 'My father had arrived in Italy to collect the money he had inherited，when suddenly he fell ill．When he died，we found two papers in his desk．One was a letter to his girl；the other was a will．'
　　'What was the letter？'asked Mr Brown low ．
　　'It was written when he was ill，telling the girl how ashamed he was that she was pregnant．He asked her not to remember him as a bad man but as someone who had made a mistake．He reminded her of the day he'd given her the locket and ring．'
　　O liver's tears fell fast as he listened to the story of his father．
　　'And what about the will？'asked Mr Brown low ．
　　Monks was silent．
　　'The will，'continued Mr Brown low ，speaking for him， 'was in the same spirit as the letter．He talked of the misery of his marriage to his wife，and the evil character of you，Monks，his only son，who had been brought up by your mother to hate him．He left you and your mother an annual income of $800．The rest of his property he left to his girl Agnes and to their child，if it were born alive，and if it showed itself to be of a good，kind character．The money would only go to you，Monks，as the older son，if The younger turned out to be as evil as you．'
　　'My mother，'said Monks， 'burnt this will，and never sent the letter．The girl Agnes left her home in secret，so that her pregnancy would not bring shame on her family．I swore to my mother，when she was dying，that if I ever found my half-brother，I would do him all the harm I could．He would feel my hatred like a whip on his back．I paid Fagin to trap O liver into a life of crime．But the n he escaped，and that stupid，interfering girl Nancy talked to you．If I'd had the chance，I would have finished what I'd begun．'Monks stared at O liver，and his lips moved in a silent curse．
　　'And the locket and ring？'asked Mr Brown low ．
　　'I bought the m from Mr and Mrs Bumble，who had stolen the m from the nurse，who had stolen the m from Agnes，the dead girl．I've already told you how I threw the m into the river．
　　Mr Brown low turned to Rose． 'I have one more thing to explain，'he said to the girl．
　　'I don't know if I have the strength to hear it now，'she murmured， 'having heard so much already．'
　　Mr Brown low put his hand under her arm． 'You have a great deal of courage，dear child，'he said kindly．He turned to Monks． 'Do you know this young lady，sir？'
　　'Yes．'
　　'I don't know you，'said Rose faintly．
　　'The father of poor Agnes had two daughters，'said Mr Brown low ． 'What happened to the other one，who was only a young child at the time？'
　　'When Agnes disappeared，'replied Monks， 'her father changed his name and moved to a lonely place in Wales，where no one would know about the family shame．He died very soon afterwards，and this young daughter was taken in by some poor people．My mother hated Agnes and everybody connected with her．She hunted for this young sister，and made sure that her life would be unhappy．She told the poor people who had taken her in that the girl was illegitimate，and that she came from a bad family with an evil reputation．So the child led a life of miserable poverty-until Mrs May lie saw her by chance，pitied her，and took her home．'
　　'And do you see this young sister now？'asked Mr Brown low ．
　　'Yes．Standing by your side．'
　　Rose could hardly speak． 'So…O liver is my nephew？'
　　'I can never call you aunt，'cried O liver． 'You'll always be my own dear sister！'
　　They ran into each other's arms，both of the m crying in their happiness．A father，sister and mother had been lost and gained，and it was too much for one evening．They stood for a long time in silence，and the others left the m alone．The court was full of faces；from every corner，all eyes were on one man-Fagin．In front of him，behind，above，below -he seemed surrounded by staring eyes．Not one of the faces showed any sympathy towards him；all were determined that he should hang．At last，the re was a cry of 'Silence！'，and everyone looked towards the door．The jury returned，and passed close to Fagin．He could tell nothing from their faces；They could have been made of stone．The n the re was complete stillness-not a whisper，not a breath…Guilty．The whole court rang with a great shout，echoing through all the rooms as the crowd ran out of the building to tell all the people waiting outside．The news was that he would die on Monday．
　　Fagin thought of nothing but death that night．He began to remember all the people he had ever known who had been hung．He could hardly count the m．They might have sat in the same prison cell as he was sitting in now．He thought about death by hanging-the rope，the cloth bag over the head，the sudden change from strong men to bundles of clothe s，hanging at the end of a rope．
　　As his last night came，despair seized Fagin's evil soul．He could not sit still，and hurried up and down his small cell，gasping with terror，his eyes flashing with hate and anger．The n he lay trembling on his stone bed and listened to the clock striking the hours．Where would he be when those hours came round again？
　　In the middle of that Sunday night，Mr Brown low and O liver were allowed to enter the prison．Several strong doors were unlocked，and eventually They entered Fagin's cell．The old robber was sitting on the bed，whispering to himself，his face more like a trapped animal's than a human's．
　　'You have some papers，Fagin，'said Mr Brown low quietly， 'which were given to you by Monks to look after．'
　　'It's a lie！'replied Fagin，not looking at him． 'I haven't got any．'
　　'For the love of God，'said Mr Brown low ，very seriously， 'don't lie to us now，on the night before your death．You know that Sikes is dead and Monks has confessed．Where are the papers？'
　　'I'll tell you，O liver，'said Fagin． 'Come here．'He whispered to him． 'They're in a bag up the chimney in the front room at the top of the house．But I want to talk to you，my dear．'
　　'Yes，'said O liver． 'Will you pray with me？'
　　'Outside，outside，'said Fagin，pushing the boy in front of him towards the door． 'Say I've gone to sleep-They'll believe you．You can take me out with you when you go．'The old man's eyes shone with a mad light．
　　'It's no good，'said Mr Brown low ，taking O liver's hand ． 'He's gone too far，and we can never reach him now．'
　　The cell door opened，and as the visitors left，Fagin started struggling and fighting with his guards，screaming so loudly that the prison walls rang with the sound．
　　They left the prison building in the grey light of dawn．Outside in the street，huge crowds were already gathering，joking and laughing，and pushing to get the best places near the great black platform，where the rope hung ready for its morning's work．
　　Less than three months later，Rose married Harry May lie．For her sake，Harry had abandoned his political ambitions，and had become a simple man of the church．The re was no longer any mystery about Rose's birth，but even if the re had been，Harry would not have cared．They lived next to the church in a peaceful village．Mrs May lie went to live with the m，and spent the rest of her days in quiet contentment．
　　Mr Brown low adopted O liver as his son．They moved to a house in the same quiet village，and were just as happy．Dr Losberne discovered suddenly that the air in Chertsey did not suit him．In less than three months he，too，had moved-to a cottage just outside the village，where he took up gardening and fishing with great energy and enthusiasm．
　　Mr Brown low suggested that half the remaining money from the will should be given to Monks and the other half to O liver，although by law it should all have gone to O liver alone．O liver was glad to accept the suggestion．Monks went off with his money to the other side of the world，where he spent it quickly and was soon in prison for another act of fraud．In prison he became ill and died．The remaining members of Fagin's gang died in similar ways in other distant countries，all except Charley Bates，who turned his back on his past life of crime and lived honestly，as a farmer．
　　Noah Claypole was given a free pardon for telling the police about Fagin．He soon became employed as an informer for the police，spying on people and telling the police about anyone who had broken the law．Mr and Mrs Bumble lost their jobs and became poorer and poorer，eventually living in poverty in the same workhouse that They had once managed．
　　In that quiet country village，Theyears passed peacefully．Mr Brown low filled the mind of his adopted son with
　　knowledge，and as he watched the boy grow up，he was reminded more and more of his old friend，O liver's father．The two orphans，Rose and O liver，led lives that were truly happy．The hardships that They had once suffered had left no bitterness in their gentle souls，and all their lives They showed the mercy and kindness to others that God himself shows to all things that breathe ．

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※







■ 1 The Bennets'new neighbour
　　It is a truth well known to all the world that an unmarried man in possession of a large fortune must be in need of a wife． And when such a man moves into a neighbourhood， even if nothing is known about his feelings or opinions， this truth is so clear to the surrounding families，that they think of him immediately as the future husband of one or other of their daughters．
　　‘My dear Mr Bennet，’said Mrs Bennet to her husband one day，‘have you heard that someone is going to rent Netherfield Park at last？’
　　‘No，Mrs Bennet，I haven't，’said her husband．
　　‘Don't you want to know who is renting it？’cried Mrs Bennet impatiently．
　　‘You want to tell me，and I don't mind listening．’
　　Mrs Bennet needed no further encouragement．‘Well，my dear， I hear that he's a very rich young man from the north of England．It seems he came to see Netherfield on Monday and was so delighted with it that he arranged to rent it at once．Of course，it is the finest house in the area，with the largest gar- dens． His servants will be here by the end of the week， and he will be arriving soon afterwards！’
　　‘What is his name？’asked Mr Bennet．
　　‘Bingley．’
　　‘Is he married or single？’
　　‘Oh， single， my dear，of course！A single man of large for- tune—he has an income of four or five thousand pounds a year．How wonderdul for our girls！’
　　‘Why？ How can it affect them？’Mr Bennet asked．
　　‘My dear Mr Bennet，’she replied，‘how can you be so an- noying！You must realize I'm thinking of his marrying one of our daughters．’
　　‘Is that his purpose in coming to the area？’
　　‘His purpose？No， of course not． But it's very likely that he’ll fall in love with one of them．And I want him to see the girls as soon as possible，before our other neighbours introduce themselves． So you must visit him as soon as he arrives．’
　　‘I really don't see why I should，’said Mr Bennet．‘You and the girls can visit him， or perhaps you should send them by themselves．Yes， that might be better， as you're as attractive as any of them， and Mr Bingley might like you best．’
　　‘My dear， you flatter me，’replied his wife，‘I certainly have been called beautiful in the past， but I think a woman with five adult daughters should stop thinking of her own beauty．Mr Bennet，I beg you to visit him．You know it's cor- rect for the gentleman of the family to visit new neighbours first．I simply cannot take the girls to see him unless you have already met him．’
　　‘Surely you worry too much about the rules of polite society． I'm sure Mr Bingley will be delighted to see you all．And I’ll write him a few lines，which you can give him， agree- ing gladly to his marrying any of the girls， although I must es- pecially recommend my dear little Lizzy．’
　　‘Oh no， Mr Bennet！’gasped Mrs Bennet， horrified．‘Please don't do that！And Lizzy is no better than the others，al- though I know she is your favourite．’
　　‘Our daughters are all very silly，ignorant girls， it's true．But at least Lizzy is a little more intelligent than her sisters．’
　　‘Mr Bennet， how can you speak so unkindly of your own children？ Oh dear，how ill I feel！ Have you no pity for me？Don't you realize how I suffer？’
　　‘Indeed，my dear， I've suffered with you for the last twentythree years．But I think you will recover， and live to see many more rich young men come into the neighbourhood．’
　　When he was young， Mr Bennet had made the mistake of falling in love with a pretty but foolish young woman．During the long years of their marriage， he had had time to regret his mistake．He soon realized that his wife had little intelligence or common sense， and was only interested in talking， shopping and finding husbands for her daughters．His experience had made him rather bitter， and he could not stop himself mocking his wife， who never understood her husband's sense of humour．
　　So when， a week later， Mrs Bennet discovered that her hus- band had in fact visited Mr Bingley at Netherfield， she was surprised and very pleased．But she and her daughters tried in vain to persuade Mr Bennet to describe the wealthy stranger，and in the end they had to rely on another neighbour's description．
　　‘He sounds wonderful，Mama！’cried Lydia，the youngest and noisiest of the sisters．‘Charlotte Lucas's father has been to see him， and says he's quite young， very handsome， and ex- tremely charming！And even better，he loves dancing！Every- body knows that means he's very likely to fall in love！’
　　As politeness required， Mr Bingley came to visit Mr Bennet a few days later． He was not， however， fortunate enough to see the Bennet girls， who were hiding behind the curtains in an up- stairs room in order to catch sight of the handsome stranger．Mrs Bennet planned to invite him to dinner， but in fact they met him at another social event first．The Bennets lived in the small Hertfordshire village of Longbourn，and public dances were regularly held in the nearest town， Meryton．The girls were greatly looking forward to this particular dance， because they had heard that Mr Bingley would be attending， with a group of friends from London．
　　On the night of the dance， all eyes were on Mr Bingley as he entered the room． He had brought his two sisters， with the husband of the elder， Mr Hurst， and another young man，Mr- Darcy．Mr Bingley was indeed good-looking and gentleman- like， and his sisters were fine， fashionable women．However， ev- erybody was soon talking about Mr Darcy， a tall， handsome man， who，it was said， had an income of ten thousand pounds a year．The ladies in the room gazed at him in admiration for about half the evening， until they became aware of his constant frown and his unwillingness to talk or dance． Then there was general agreement that he was proud and disagreeable， and considered himself superior to country people．Mr Bingley， on the other hand，made himself popular with the ladles by danc- ing every dance and talking to everybody．
　　As there were not as many gentlemen as ladies， Elizabeth Bennet did not have a partner for one of the dances， and was sitting watching the dancing．Mr Darcy was standing near her，and when Mr Bingley came up to speak to his friend，Elizabeth could not avoid hearing their conversation．
　　‘Come， Darcy，’said Bingley，‘I hate to see you looking so cross！Why don't you dance with one of these lovely girls？’
　　‘Certainly not，’replied Darcy．‘You know how I hate dancing with a partner I don't know．I would particularly dis- like it at a village dance like this．Apart from your sisters，there isn't a woman in the room I would even consider dancing with． You are dancing with the only attractive girl here．’He was looking at Mrs Bennet's eldest daughter Jane， who was waiting for Bingley to join her for the next dance．
　　‘Oh yes！She's the most beautiful creature I've ever seen！But just behind you is one of her sisters．She's very pretty，and I'm sure she's very pleasant．My partner could introduce you．’
　　‘Who do you mean？’And Darcy turned to look at Elizabeth for a moment．‘No，’he said coldly，‘she's not attractive enough to tempt me．Go back to your partner， Bingley．’
　　This conversation did not endear Mr Darcy to Elizabeth， but she told the story very cheerfully and amusingly to her friends．
　　The evening passed very happily for everybody else， and Mrs Bennet was delighted with the effect her eldest daughter had had on Mr Bingley．
　　‘He danced with Jane twice！’she told her husband later．‘He danced with all the others only once！And he really is so handsome！But his friend Mr Darcy was so rude to poor Eliza- beth！ Luckily，she doesn't care！She wouldn't want to please him！Such a horrible，proud man！I simply hate him！’
　　When Jane and Elizabeth were alone，they discussed their dancing partners．
　　‘I was really very flattered when Mr Bingley asked me to dance a second time！’said Jane， blushing．‘I didn't expect it at all！’
　　‘Didn't you？’said Elizabeth．‘I did．Dear Jane！ You were five times prettier than any other woman in the room， but you're too modest ever to expect admiration．’
　　‘I have to admit that I liked Mr Bingley，’continued Jane in her gentle voice．‘He's so good-mannered and agreeable！’
　　‘He's also handsome，’added her sister，‘which makes his character quite perfect！But what did you think of his sisters？’
　　‘Very pleasant when you get to know them． The younger，Miss Caroline Bingley，will be living at Netherfield with her brother． I'm sure we’ll enjoy having her as a neighbour．’
　　Elizabeth listened in silence．She was not convinced．‘Jane is so kind！’she thought．‘Always ready to see the good side of people's characters！I considered Mr Bingley's sisters too proud， almost rude， in fact．I'm sure they feel superior to most other people，like Mr Darcy．’But she did not say any more．
　　After the dance the Bennet and Bingley families began to visit each other every few days．It became evident that Mr Bingley admired Jane very much， and Elizabeth knew that her sister was close to falling in love with him． She was discussing this with her good friend，Charlotte Lucas， one day Charlotte was a sensible， intelligent young woman of twenty-seven， the eldest daughter of Sir William and Lady Lucas， who were neighbours of the Bennet family．
　　‘It's a good thing，’said Elizabeth，‘that if Jane is in love with Mr Bingley，nobody will know，because she always be- haves so cheerfully and normally．’
　　‘That's sometimes a mistake，’replied Charlotte， shaking her head wisely．‘If she doesn't show her feelings at all，even to the man she loves， she may lose the opportunity of catching him．Jane should use every moment she gets with Bingley to attract and encourage him．’
　　‘But I consider a man should try to discover a woman's feelings，not wait for her encouragement！ And Jane probably doesn't know what her real feelings for Bingley are yet—she has only seen him a few times，not often enough to understand his character， or be sure that she really loves him．’
　　‘Well， I wish Jane success with all my heart，’said Char- lotte finally，‘but I think she'd have as much chance of happi- ness if she married him tomorrow， as if she studied his charac- ter for a whole year． Happiness in marriage is simply a question of chance． I think it's better to know as little as possible about the person you're going to spend your life with．’
　　Elizabeth laughed， sure that Charlotte did not mean what she was saying．
　　While observing Mr Bingley's interest in Jane，however，Elizabeth had not noticed Mr Darcy's interest in herself．Al- though at first he had not even considered her pretty， he now began to realize what a beautiful expression her dark eyes gave to her intelligent face， and what an attractive figure she had．‘Of course， she is only an unfashionable village girl，’he told himself， but her conversation is often quite amusing．’When- ever they met， he did not speak to her， but stood near her， lis- tening to her and watching her closely， conscious of a wish to know her better．
　　One evening at a party at the Lucases’house， Darcy was standing alone， as usual， away from the other guests， watching the dancing． His host， Sir William，came to speak to him．
　　‘Mr Darcy！ Are you enjoying the dancing，sir？ What a de- lightful entertainment it is！’
　　Darcy frowned．‘Yes，’he said with cool disdain，‘it's something that any uneducated person can be good at．’
　　‘I'm sure you're good at dancing yourself， sir，’replied Sir William cheerfully．‘Look！Here's Miss Elizabeth Bennet．’She was crossing the room at that moment．‘Let me persuade you to dance with her．You cannot refuse to dance when so much beauty is in front of you．’
　　‘Indeed， sir，’replied Elizabeth quickly， in some embarrass- ment， ‘I have no intention of dancing． You must excuse me．’
　　‘Miss Bennet，please allow me the pleasure of dancing with you，’said Mr Darcy politely，holding out his hand．
　　But with equal politeness Elizabeth refused again，and turned away．Mr Darcy was watching her walk away，with a slight smile on his face， when Caroline Bingley came up to him．
　　‘Mr Darcy，’she said，‘I'm sure I know what you're thinking—how boring all these silly little country people are！’
　　‘Not at all，Miss Bingley．In fact，I was just thinking what pleasure a pair of fine eyes can give．’
　　‘Really！And who do these fine eyes belong to，may I ask？’
　　‘Miss Elizabeth Bennet．’
　　‘Well！Let me be the first to congratulate you，Mr Darcy！When will the wedding be？’
　　‘Ah！That's what I expected you to say．A lady's imagina- tion jumps from admiration， to love， to marriage， in a moment．’
　　‘Well， of course， when you're married， you will often have her charming mother and sisters to stay． How delightful for you！’And Miss Bingley， seeing that Darcy remained calm，continued to mock the Bennet family as amusingly as she could．






■ 2 Jane's illness
　　Mr Bennet had a comfortable income of two thousand a year， and a pleasant house in Longbourn． But， unfortu- nately for his daughters， after his death all his property would pass to a distant male relation．Mrs Bennet's father had been a lawyer，and had only left his daughter a small amount of money． She had a brother who owned shops in London， and she also had a sister， married to a Mr Philips． He had been her fa- ther's clerk，and now carried on his late employer's business．
　　Mr and Mrs Philips lived in Meryton， which was only a kilo- metre or so from the village of Longbourn．It was a most con- venient distance for the Bennet girls， who were usually tempted there three or four times a week，to visit their aunt or a dress- maker who lived opposite．The youngest daughters， Kitty and Lydia，were particularly regular visitors．Their minds were more vacant than their sisters，’and if no better entertainment was available，a walk to Meryton always provided some amuse- ment， as well as interesting local news from their aunt．
　　The latest news， which delighted Kitty and Lydia， was that the regiment which had recently arrived in Meryton was to stay there for the whole winter．The two girls now visited their aunt every day， and as Mr Philips knew all the officers，Kitty and Lydia were soon introduced to them．At home they could talk of nothing but officers and their handsome uniforms：even Mr Bingley's fortune now seemed hardly worth considering．
　　After listening to their praise of the officers one morning， Mr Bennet said coolly，‘From what I can see，you must be two of the silliest girls in the country．I've suspected it for some time，but now I'm convinced．’
　　Kitty was embarrassed and did not reply，but Lydia，the youngest， continued to express her admiration for a certain Captain Carter， with perfect indifference．
　　‘I am very surprised，my dear，’said Mrs Bennet，‘that you should be so ready to think your own children silly．As it hap- pens， they are all very clever．’
　　‘That is the only point，I think， on which we do not agree．I am afraid I must say that I consider our two youngest daugh- ters unusually foolish．’
　　‘My dear Mr Bennet， you mustn't expect such young girls to have the common sense of their father or mother．I remem- ber when I used to like a red coat myself， and indeed I still do．If a good-looking officer with five or six thousand a year want- ed to marry one of my girls， I wouldn't turn him down．And I thought Colonel Forster looked very handsome last night at Sir William's，in his regimental uniform．’
　　Just then a servant entered with a note for Jane， which had come from Netherfield．Mrs Bennet's eyes shone with pleasure and she called out eagerly， while her daughter was reading it，‘Well，Jane， who is it from？ What does he say？Tell us， tell us quickly，my love！’
　　‘It's from Miss Bingley，’said Jane．‘She invites me to din- ner at Netherfield，as she and her sister are alone．It seems her brother and the gentlemen are having dinner with the officers，in Meryton．’
　　‘With the officers！’cried Lydia．‘I wonder why aunt Philips didn't tell us that！’
　　‘Having dinner in Meryton，’repeated Mrs Bennet， shaking her head．‘That's very unlucky．’
　　‘May I take the carriage？’asked Jane．
　　‘No， my dear， you'd better ride over there， because it looks likely to rain，and then you’ll have to stay the night．’
　　‘That would be a good plan，’said Elizabeth to her mother，‘if you were sure they wouldn't offer to send her home in their carriage．’
　　‘Oh， but they can't！The gentlemen must have taken Mr Bingley's carriage to go to Meryton．’
　　‘I'd much rather go in the carriage，’Jane said．
　　‘But，my dear，your father can't spare the horses， I'm sure．They're needed on the farm， aren't they， Mr Bennet？’
　　Mr Bennet finally agreed that they were in fact being used that day in the fields．So Jane set out on her horse，while her mother called cheerfully after her，‘I do hope it’ll rain heavily，my love！’And Jane had not been gone for long before it rained hard．Elizabeth was a little worried about her sister，but Mrs Bennet was delighted．‘What a good idea of mine that was！’she said more than once， extremely pleased with herself．
　　Not until the next morning，however，did she realize the full extent of her success．After breakfast a servant from Nether- field arrived with a note from Jane to Elizabeth，explaining that Jane had caught cold on her wet ride， and had been invited to stay at Netherfield until she recovered．
　　‘Well，my dear，’said Mr Bennet，‘if your daughter should become seriously ill and die， it would be a comfort to know that she died in a good cause， and in obedience to your orders．’
　　‘Oh， I'm not afraid of her dying．People don't die of colds．She’ll be looked after well at Netherfield．As long as she stays there， everything will be all right．’
　　But Elizabeth felt really anxious，and was determined to go to her sister．As the carriage was not available， and she was not keen on riding， she decided to walk the five kilometres to Netherfield．Kitty and Lydia accompanied her as far as Mery- ton， where they went to visit one of the officers’wives．Eliza- beth continued alone， crossing field after field and jumping im- patiently over streams， in her anxiety to see her sister．
　　When she arrived at Netherfield，with tired feet，muddy stockings and a face healthily pink with exercise， she was shown straight into the sitting-room． The two sisters， Miss Bingley and Mrs Hurst，could hardly believe that she had come so far alone and on foot in such bad weather， but they received her politely． Their brother， however， was more than polite： he was kind and considerate towards her．Mr Darcy said very little，hesitating between admiration of her healthy good looks and doubt whether she should have come such a distance alone．Mr Hurst said nothing at all，as he was thinking only of his breakfast．
　　Elizabeth was glad to be taken almost immediately to her sister's room， where she found Jane delighted to see her， but very feverish and unwell．The doctor came， and after examining his patient， advised that she should stay in bed and take some medicine．Elizabeth stayed with her all day，looking after her，and the Bingley sisters also spent some time in the patient's room．However，in the afternoon， when it was time for Eliza- beth to leave，Jane seemed so upset that Miss Bingley was obliged to invite Elizabeth to stay at Netherfield for the present，and a servant was sent to Longbourn to inform the Bennet family and bring back some clothes．
　　That evening Elizabeth went down to dinner，leaving Jane in bed in her room．She noticed the Bingley sisters’apparent con- cern for Jane change to indifference in a few moments， and knew she had been right to dislike them at first sight． Mr Bingley， indeed， was the only one of the group whose behaviour she was satisfied with． His anxiety for Jane was evident， and his politeness towards herself most pleasing． But the others， she felt， treated her as an unwelcome guest． Miss Bingley was con- centrating all her attention on Mr Darcy， and Mrs Hurst also joined in their conversation，while Mr Hurst was only interest- ed in eating， drinking and playing cards．
　　When Elizabeth left the room after dinner to see if Jane needed anything，Miss Bingley at once began to criticize her．
　　‘What bad manners she has！She's both proud， and lacking in politeness to her superiors！She has no conversation， no ele- gance and no beauty！’
　　Mrs Hurst agreed， and added，‘She has no good qualities，ex- cept that she's an excellent walker． I’ll never forget her ap- pearance this morning．She really looked almost wild．’
　　‘She did indeed，Louisa．How silly of her to come at all！Why must she run around the countryside，just because her sis- ter has a cold？ Her hair looked so untidy！ And her dress！Simply covereb in mud！’
　　‘I must say，’said Bingley，‘I didn't notice any of that．I thought she looked remarkably attractive when she arrived this morning．
　　‘You observed her wild appearance，I'm sure，Mr Darcy，’said Miss Bingley，‘and I imagine you wouldn't wish your sis- ter to make such a show of herself．’
　　‘Certainly not．’
　　‘Walking four or five kilometres，whatever it was，up to her ankles in mud， and alone， quite alone！It seems to me to show a dreadful sort of independence， a country girl's indifference to what is acceptable．’
　　‘I think it shows a very pleasing affection for her sister，’said Bingley．
　　‘I'm afraid， Mr Darcy，’whispered Miss Bingley，‘that this adventure has rather lessened your admiration of her fine eyes．’
　　‘Not at all，’he replied．‘They were brightened by the ex- ercise．’
　　After a short pause， Mrs Hurst began again．‘I have a great liking for Jane Bennet．She is really a very sweet girl， and I wish with all my heart she were well married．But with such a father and mother， and with such vulgar relations， I'm afraid there's no chance of it．’
　　‘I think the Bennet girls have an uncle who's a lawyer in Meryton．’
　　‘Yes，and they have another who owns shops in Cheapside！Such a nice part of London！’Both the sisters laughed．
　　‘If they had enough uncles to fill Cheapside，’cried Bing- ley，‘it wouldn't make them any less charming！’
　　‘But it must considerably lessen their chances of marrying men of any position in the world，’replied Darcy．
　　Bingley did not answer，but his sisters agreed enthusiastically， and continued mocking their dear friend's vul- gar relations for some time．
　　Late in the evening， when Elizabeth was satisfied that Jane was asleep， she felt she ought to go downstairs again．She found the party in the sitting-room， playing cards， but although they invited her to join in their game， she refused politely， and picked up a book to read．
　　‘I can fetch you more books to read，if you wish，’offered Bingley，‘but I'm afraid I haven't got a large library．Unlike you，I'm too lazy to spend much time reading．’
　　‘What a delightful library you have at Pemberley，Mr Darcy！’said Miss Bingley．‘And what a beautiful house it is！Charles，when you buy your house，I hope it will be even half as lovely as Pemberley．’
　　‘I hope so too，’agreed Bingley．
　　‘And your dear sister， Mr Darcy？ I expect she's grown since the spring． I want so much to see her again！I've never met anyone who delighted me so much！Such an appearance，such manners！And so extremely accomplished for her age！’
　　‘I'm always surprised，’said Bingley，‘to find how very ac- complished all young ladies are． How do they have the time and patience to learn all these skills？’
　　‘Certainly people use the word“accomplished”too loosely，’said Darcy，‘but I am far from agreeing with you about ladies in general．I cannot boast of knowing more than six who are really accomplished．’
　　‘Then，’said Elizabeth，‘your idea of an accomplished woman must include a great many qualities．’
　　‘Yes， a great many．’
　　‘Oh！Certainly，’cried his faithful assistant，Miss Bingley，‘an accomplished woman must have a thorough knowledge of music，singing， drawing， dancing and modern languages， and besides this， a certain something in her manner of walking， in her voice and in her behaviour．’
　　‘All this she must possess，’added Darcy，‘and something more solid，the improvement of her mind by wide reading．’
　　‘I'm no longer surprised at your knowing only six accom- plished women，’said Elizabeth．‘I rather wonder at your knowing any．I've never seen such elegance， and intelligence，and knowledge， as you describe， in one woman．’
　　Mrs Hurst and Miss Bingley were both protesting loudly that they knew many women like this， when Mr Hurst called their attention back to the card game．As this meant an end to the conversation， Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room．
　　‘Miss Elizabeth Bennet，’said Miss Bingley to Darcy，‘is one of those women who try to appear attractive to men by un- dervaluing other women． I think that's a mean trick．’
　　‘It is true，’said Darcy，‘that there is meanness in all the tricks used by ladies to attract men．’
　　Miss Bingley was not satisfied enough with this answer to continue the conversation．
　　The next morning Elizabeth was glad to be able to inform Mr Bingley and his sisters that Jane was very much better．
　　In spite of this improvement， however， she asked for her mother to be sent for， as she wanted Mrs Bennet's opinion of Jane's state of health．Soon after breakfast， therefore， Mrs Bennet， accompanied by her two youngest daughters， reached Netherfield．
　　Elizabeth， although relieved to hear that her mother did not think Jane's illness serious，began to regret asking her to come， when she saw the Bingley sisters smiling at Mrs Bennet's remarks．Elizabeth blushed for her mother， who could not help showing her lack of intelligence and common sense in every- thing she said．
　　Kitty and Lydia made an equally had impression．They had been whispering together， when suddenly Lydia，who was an attractive， confident， well-grown girl of fifteen， pushed herself rudely forward．She begged Mr Bingley to hold a ball at Netherfield． With his usual politeness， Mr Bingley promised he would，but Elizabeth saw his sisters exchanging meaningful glances．She was quite glad when her mother and sisters left．She and Jane were to stay another night at Netherfield， to allow Jane to recover completely．
　　That evening Elizabeth appeared again in the sitting-room．She could not avoid noticing how frequently Mr Darcy's eyes were fixed on her， but as she felt sure that so great a man could not possibly admire her，she assumed that when he looked at her， he was criticizing her in some way．This thought did not cause her any pain， as she liked him too little to care for his ap- proval．
　　In the conversations she had with him， she spoke in her usual slightly mocking manner， rather expecting to offend him，but was surprised by the quiet politeness of his replies．Darcy had never before been so charmed by any woman．He really be- lieved that if she did not have such vulgar relations， he might be in danger of falling in love with her． Miss Bingley saw or suspected enough to be jealous， and her great anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane was increased by her wish to get rid of Elizabeth．
　　Fortunately perhaps， for almost everyone at Netherfield，Elizabeth and her sister， who was now quite recovered， were returning home the next day． Only Mr Bingley showed real sorrow at this， and was concerned that Jane might not be fit enough to travel． Mr Darcy was quite relieved， and determined that no sign of admiration for Elizabeth should escape him now． Miss Bingley's politeness to Elizabeth， as well as her af- fection for Jane， increased rapidly as the moment of departure approached，and she was able to say goodbye to them with many warm expressions of friendliness and a promise to visit them very soon．
　　Mr Bennet was glad to welcome his eldest daughters home again，as he had felt their absence from the family circle，but Mrs Bennet， who had hoped they would stay much longer， was quite disappointed to see them come back in such a short time．






■ 3 Mr Collins visits Longbourn
　　‘I hope，my dear，’said Mr Bennet to his wife at break- fast the next morning，‘that you have told the cook to send up a good dinner today，as I am expecting a visitor．’
　　‘Who is it， my dear？ I know of nobody who is coming， un- less Charlotte Lucas happens to call in， and I hope my dinners are good enough for her．’
　　‘The person I'm talking about is a gentleman and a stranger．’
　　Mrs Bennet's eyes shone with excitement．‘It's Mr Bingley，I'm sure！ Why，Jane，you never mentioned it！Well，I’ll be extremely glad to see him． Lydia， my love，ring the bell．I must speak to the cook at once．’
　　‘It is not Mr Bingley，’said her husband．‘It's a person whom I have never seen before．’
　　This caused general astonishment， and he had the pleasure of being eagerly questioned by his wife and five daughters all at the same time． Having amused himself for some time with their curiosity，he finally explained．‘I have recently received a letter from my cousin，Mr Collins，who，as you know，will inherit all my property when I die， and may throw you out of this house as soon as he wants．’
　　‘Oh， my dear！’cried his wife．‘Please don't mention that hateful man． It's the hardest thing in the world to accept the fact that your property is not left to your own children， and I'm sure， if I were you， I'd have tried to do something about it．’
　　Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain the legal situation to her again．They had often attempted to do this before．But it was a matter which Mrs Bennet refused to understand， and she con- tinued to complain bitterly about Mr Collins．
　　‘It certainly is most unjust，’agreed Mr Bennet，‘and noth- ing can clear Mr Collins from the guilt of inheriting this house．But if you listen while I read his letter to you，you may perhaps be a little softened by his manner of expressing himself．’
　　He read aloud the following letter：
　　Dear Sir，
　　The disagreement between you and my late respected fa- ther always worried me， and since his death I have frequently wished to improve the relationship between our families．Af- ter a long period of study and training I have recently become a priest，and have been fortunate enough to gain the patron- age of Lady Catherine de Bourgh， widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh．This generous lady has given me the post of rector at Hunsford， which was luckily vacant．Hunsford is the village near her own large country house in Kent．Here I carry out the duties of my profession whenever necessary， and I take great care to behave at all times with grateful respect towards her ladyship．As a priest，moreover， I feel it my duty to encourage all families in my area of influence to live peacefully．Because of this，I flatter myself that I am acting correctly in offering you my friendship．I am of course concerned that when I even- tually inherit all your property， your daughters will doubtless be very poor，and I do apologize for this．I promise you I am ready to make amends in every possible way—but more about this later．If you do not object， I propose to visit you and your family on Monday November 18th，at four o’clock， and shall probably stay until the following Saturday week．This will cause me no inconvenience at all，as Lady Catherine is far from objecting to my occasional absence from my duties．
　　I remain，dear sir，with respectful good wishes to your lady and your daughters， your friend， William Collins．
　　‘So we can expect this peace-making gentleman at four o’clock today，’said Mr Bennet，as he folded up the letter．‘He appears to be a most polite and serious young man．How considerate of Lady Catherine to allow him to visit us！’
　　‘Well，if he is ready to make amends to the girls in some way， I shall certainly not discourage him，’said Mrs Bennet．
　　‘Although it's difficult，’said Jane，‘to guess how he in- tends to do that，it's good of him to want to help us．’
　　‘I think he's peculiar，’said Elizabeth．‘He sounds too pleased with himself，and he speaks so politely of Lady Cather- ine！And why does he apologize for inheriting Father's prop- erty in future？ We know it's not his fault．Can he be a sensible man，sir？’she added，turning to Mr Bennet．
　　‘No， my dear， I think not．I have great hopes of finding him quite the opposite．There is a mixture of servility and self- importance in his letter， which promises to be entertaining．I am impatient to see him．’
　　Mary，the middle daughter， who spent most of her time reading and who seldom joined in family conversations， now re- marked that in her opinion his letter was well expressed．But Kitty and Lydia did not show any interest in the letter or its writer．As it was highly unlikely that their cousin would arrive in a regimental uniform， they could not imagine having any pleasure in meeting him． Their mother， however， had changed her attitude towards Mr Collins after his letter， and was now preparing to meet him with such calmness that it astonished her husband and daughters．
　　Mr Collins arrived punctually， and was received with great politeness by the whole family． Mr Bennet indeed said little，but the ladies were ready enough to talk， and Mr Collins did not seem in need of encouragement．He was a tall， heavy- looking young man of twenty-five．His expression was serious，and his manners very formal．Soon after his arrival， he said to Mrs Bennet，‘Madam， I must compliment you on having such a fine family of daughters． I had heard much of their beauty， but I find them even more beautiful than reports have stated．I do not doubt you will see them all well married quite soon．’
　　Mrs Bennet never quarrelled with compliments，and she answered，‘You're very kind，sir，and indeed I do hope so，be-cause otherwise they’ll have nothing at all to live on．’
　　‘You refer perhaps to my inheriting the Bennet property？’
　　‘Ah，yes，sir，I do！You must confess it is a sad business for my poor girls．’
　　‘I am very aware，madam，of the hardship to your lovely daughters—and could say more about this，but I am cautious of saying too much too soon．But I would like to say that I have come prepared to admire the young ladies．And perhaps when we know each other better—’
　　The bell rang for dinner，and the family moved into the dining-room with their guest．The girls smiled secretly at each other，as Mr Collins praised the hall，the dining-room and all the furniture．Mrs Bennet would normally have been delighted with such praise，but she could not help thinking that he was perhaps admiring it all as his future property．The dinner，too， he considered excellent，and he asked which of his charming cousins was responsible for it．But Mrs Bennet explained quite sharply to him that they were very well able to afford a good cook，and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen． He begged her pardon immediately for offending her，and con- tinned to apologize for about a quarter of an hour．
　　Mr Bennet had hardly spoken up to now，but he thought it was time to enter the conversation．‘You seem very fortunate in your patron，Mr Collins，’he said．
　　He could not have chosen a better opening remark．Mr Collins spoke enthusiastically for several minutes in praise of Lady Catherine．‘Never in my life have I witnessed such con- siderate behaviour in a person of high birth！Although she is such a great lady，she has never treated me with disdain．She talks to me almost as an equal，and gives me advice．For exam- ple，she has recommended me to marry as soon as possible．And do you know，she has asked me to dinner twice at her house！ Some people consider her proud，but she has only ever been kind to me．She even took the trouble to visit my small house， and was thoughtful enough to suggest one or two improve- ments—some shelves upstairs．’
　　‘That is very correct and polite，I'm sure，’said Mrs Bennet．‘Does she live near you，sir？’
　　‘Only a small country road separates my poor house from Rosings Park，her ladyship's home．’
　　‘I think you said she is a widow？Has she any family？’
　　‘She has only one daughter，who will inherit Rosings and all Lady Catherine's property．A most charming young lady，un- fortunately in weak health．I often pay her some little compli- ment on her appearance or her accomplishments when I visit Rosings．Lady Catherine appreciates these compliments to her daughter，and I see it as my duty to please her ladyship．’
　　‘I am sure you're right，’said Mr Bennet．‘No doubt you are expert at flattering with delicacy．May I ask how you think of these pleasing compliments？’
　　‘Some of them come to me at the time，but in my spare moments I do occasionally prepare a few words which may be suitable for different occasions．’
　　Mr Bennet listened to his cousin with the greatest emjoyment．Mr Collins was as foolish as he had hoped．But by tea-time Mr Bennet had had enough，and after tea，asked his guest to read aloud to the ladies．However，when a novel was handed to Mr Collins，he looked shocked，and protested that he never read novels．He chose a religious book instead，and start- ed reading in a slow，serious voice．Lydia could not hide her boredom for long，and after only three pages she interrupted him rudely，to ask her mother a question about one of the offi- cers in Meryton Mr Collins was offended，and refused to read any more，although Mrs Bennet and her other daughters apolo- gized for Lydia's lack of manners．
　　Mr Collins was not a sensible man，and neither education nor society had improved him．The respect he felt for his patron， and his very good opinion of himself and his new position， made him proud and servile at the same time．Now that he had a home and a considerable income，he had decided to marry． The Bennet girls，who would lose their inheritance because of him，had a reputation for being attractive and charming，and his idea of making amends to them was to marry one of them． He considered this an excellent plan，and thought himself ex- tremely generous and unselfish in carrying it out．
　　He had known he was right when he arrived at Longbourn and saw Jane Bennet's lovely face．As the eldest，she should marry first，and for the first evening she was his choice．But the next morning，after a fifteen-minute conversation with Mrs Bennet，he had to change his mind．When he explained that he was hoping to find a wife among her daughters，she replied， with a happy smile，that her eldest daughter was very likely to be engaged soon．‘But there are my other daughters，Mr Collins，’she continued，encouragingly．
　　Mr Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth，and it was soon done—done while Mrs Bennet was pouring the tea． Next to Jane in birth and beauty，Elizabeth was the obvious choice．
　　Mr Bennet was delighted，hoping that she might soon have two daughters married．The man whom she had so disliked the day before was now a favourite with her．






■ 4 Elizabeth meets Mr Wickham
　　When later that morning Lydia suggested walking to Meryton to see some of the officers，all her sisters ex- cept Mary agreed to accompany her．Even Mr Collins went with them，encouraged by Mr Bennet，who was by now most anxious to have some time to himself．During their walk，the girls listened politely to Mr Collins'self-important speeches， but as soon as they entered Meryton，the younger ones no longer eved pretended to be interested in his conversation，but looked eagerly around in search of the officers．
　　Just then all the young ladies noticed a very gentleman-like young man，whom they had never seen before，walking down the street with an officer they knew．They were all wondering who the handsome stranger could be，when the officer came up to them to greet them．He asked permission to introduce his friend，whose name was Mr Wickham，and who had apparently arrived recently from London，to become an officer in the regi- ment．This was exactly as it should be，because the young man only needed an officer's uniform to become completely charm- ing．He was very good-looking，with a very pleasant，sociable manner，and after the introductions，conversation flowed most enjoyably in the little group．They were still standing and talk- ing happily together，when they heard the sound of horses，and saw Darcy and Bingley riding down the street．The two gentlemen came straight towards the ladies to greet them．Bin- gley was clearly most interested in Jane Bennet，and started talking particuarly to her．Darcy，however，was just determin- ing not to look at Elizabeth，when he suddenly noticed the stranger．By chance Elizabeth saw Darcy's and Wickham's faces at the moment when they caught sight of each other，and she was astonished at the effect of the meeting．Both changed colour，one white，the other red．After a few moments Mr Wickham touched his hat，and Mr Darcy nodded very slightly． What could this mean？It was impossible to imagine，and it was impossible not to wish to know．
　　In another moment Mr Bingley，who did not seem to have noticed what had happened，said goodbye and rode away with Mr Darcy．The two officers accompanied the young ladies to Mrs Philips’house，but did not go in，in spite of Lydia's re- peated invitations．Mrs Philips was always glad to see her nieces，and welcomed Mr Collins most politely when he was in- troduced to her．She did not，however，have any more informa- tion for the girls about the agreeable Mr Wickham．
　　‘But I tell you what，my dears，’she said brightly，‘I'm giving a little supper party for some of the officers tomorrow． I’ll ask Mr Philips to visit Mr Wickham and invite him to come too．Will you all come as well？’
　　The girls were delighted and agreed at once to this arrange- ment，and the whole group walked back to Longbourn，happily discussing the enjoyable evening they were going to have．Mr Collins had been very impressed with Mrs Philips’politeness， and when they reached Longbourn，he complimented Mrs Ben- net on her sister's elegance and charming manners．
　　The next evening the carriage took him and his five cousins to Meryton，and the girls had the pleasure of hearing，as they entered the hall，that Mr Wickham had accepted their uncle's invitation，and was at that moment in the house．
　　When Mr Collins was shown into the sitting-room，and had time to look around and admire it，he said immediately to Mrs Philips，‘Madam，I must compliment you on the size and furni- ture of this room Really，I could almost imagine myself in the smaller summer breakfast-room at Rosings！’
　　This remark did not at first please his hostess very much， but when she heard from him what Rosings was，and who its owner was，and how much Lady Latherine's furniture cost，she realized what a great compliment it was．During the evening Mr Collins found Mrs Philips a kind and attentive listener， which was fortunate，as the Bennet girls could not bring them- selves to listen to him any longer．
　　All the ladies were impatient to see Mr Wickham，and when he came into the room，he appeared far more charming and gentlemanly than any of the officers present．He was the lucky man towards whom almost every female eye turned，and Eliza- beth was the lucky woman beside whom he finally took his seat．His pleasant way of making conversation made her feel that he could talk interestingly about anything．As he did not play cards，which some of the party were doing，he stayed talk- ing to Elizabeth for a large part of the evening．She hoped he would tell her how he knew Mr Darcy，but she dared not men- tion that gentleman．Luckily，however，Mr Wickham himself began to talk about it，although in a rather hesitating manner．
　　‘Netherfield is quite near Meryton，I suppose？How long has—has Mr Darcy been staying there？’
　　‘He has been there about a month，’replied Elizabeth．Un- willing to let the matter drop，she added，‘He is a man of very large property in Derbyshire，I understand．’
　　‘Yes，’replied Wickham，‘his income is ten thousand a year at least．I know more about him than most people，as I have been closely connected with his family since childhood．’
　　Elizabeth could only look surprised．
　　‘You might well be surprised，Miss Bennet，at my saying that，after noticing，as you probably did，the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday．Do you know Mr Darcy well？’
　　‘As well as I ever wish to！’cried Elizabeth．‘I've spent four days in the same house as him，and I consider him very disagreeable．’
　　‘I've known him too long and too well to judge fairly whether he's disagreeable or not．But I believe most people would be astonished by your opinion．’
　　‘He is not at all liked here in Hertfordshire．Everybody is disgusted with his pride．You won't find him praised by any- one．’
　　‘I can't pretend to be sorry that he is valued as he deserves， but with him I believe it doesn't often happen．The world is blinded by his fortune and importance，or frightened by his proud behaviour，and sees him only as he chooses to be seen．’After a pause Wickham added，‘I wonder if he's likely to stay at Netherfield much longer．’
　　‘I don't know at all，but I hope his presence won't stop you becoming an officer in the regiment here．’
　　‘Oh no！I won't be driven away by Mr Darcy．If he wishes to avoid seeing me，he must go．The reason I have for avoiding him is one I could easily make public to the whole world—he has treated me very badly．His late father，Miss Bennet，was one of the best men who ever lived，and the most faithful friend I ever had．And whenever I'm with this Mr Darcy，I think of his father with the most painful regret．Mr Darcy has behaved wickedly to wards me，but I could forgive him anything except the insult to his father's memory．’
　　Elizabeth was fascinated，and listened eagerly，but did not like to ask any questions．Mr Wickham began to speak more generally about Meryton and the charming people he had met there．
　　In fact，that's why I was tempted to join the regiment．I'd heard that Meryton society is most agreeable．Society，I confess，is necessary to me．I have been a disappointed man， you see．I did not intend to join the army at all．The Church ought to have been my profession，and I should at this moment have a comfortable income as a Derbyshire rector，if the gentle- man we were speaking of just now had wished it．’
　　‘Indeed！’
　　‘Yes—Mr Darcy's father had always been very fond of me， and intended to give me the post of rector of Pemberley．But unfortunately，after his death，when the post became vacant，it was given to someone else．’
　　‘No！’cried Elizabeth，horrified．‘But how could that hap- pen？Why didn't you get legal advice，and claim what was rightfully yours？’
　　Mr Darcy's father had not stated his wish in writing．A man of honour could not have doubted his intention，but Mr Darcy chose to treat it as a recommendation only．I really can not accuse myself of having done anything to deserve to lose the post．The fact is，he hates me．I think he was jealous of his father's affection for me，which annoyed him from the begin- ning．
　　‘This is very shocking！I hadn't thought Mr Darcy as bad as this，although I've never liked him．I assumed he felt superi- or to everyone else，but did not suspect him of behaving in such a wicked，unjust，inhuman way！’
　　‘We grew up together at Pemberley，you know．My father gave up all his time to take care of the Pemberley farms，and was greatly appreciated as a close friend by the late Mr Darcy， who promised just before my father's death to provide for me． The present Mr Darcy did not choose to respect that promise．’
　　‘How strange that Mr Darcy's pride has not made him help you！Surely he's too proud to wish to appear dishonest— which is what I must call him．’
　　‘He's certainly very proud—proud of his position，his family，his father，and his sister，too，you know．’
　　‘What sort of a girl is Miss Darcy？’
　　He shook his head．‘It gives me pain to criticize a Darcy．But she's too much like her brother—very，very proud．She's a handsome girl of about fifteen or sixteen，and，I understand， extremely accomplished．’
　　‘I am astonished at Mr Darcy's close friendship with Mr Bingley！How can Mr Bingley，who seems so charming and kind，be friendly with such a man？’
　　‘I don't know Mr Bingley at all，but Mr Darcy can be a pleasant companion if he thinks it worthwhile．’
　　Just then they were joined by some of the others，and the conversation became more general．When Mr Collins was talk- ing to Mrs Philips about his patron，Mf Wickham looked quickly in his direction，and then asked Elizabeth，‘Does your cousin know Lady Catherine de Bourgh very well？’
　　‘I don't think he has known her for long，but she has re- cently given him the post of rector of Hunsford．’
　　‘Perhaps you know that Lady Catherine is the present Mr Darcy's aunt？I believe she is planning to marry herdaughter，who will inherit a fortune，to Mr Darcy．’
　　This information made Elizabeth smile，as she thought of poor Miss Bingley's efforts to attract Mr Darcy，which might all be in vain．The supper party came to an end，and Elizabeth went away with her head full of Mr Wickham．She could think of nothing but him，and what he had told her，all the way home．
　　The next day she told Jane everything she had discussed with Mr Wickham．Jane listened with astonishment and con- cern．She could not believe that Mr Darcy could so little deserve Mr Bingley's friendship，and yet she did not want to doubt the truthfulness of such an agreeable young man as Mr Wickham． Elizabeth，however，felt sure that Mr Darcy was to blame．
　　That morning an invitation arrived at Longbourn．Mr Bing- ley had fixed the date for the ball he had promised to give at Netherfield，and it was to be on the following Tuesday．Every female in the Bennet family was looking forward to it，even Mary，who lifted her head from her book to say，unsmiling，‘As long as I have my mornings free for serious reading，I do not mind meeting people in the evenings．I consider some relax- ation and amusement is good for everybdy．’
　　Elizabeth felt so cheerful at the thought of dancing with Mr Wickham that she made an unusual effort to speak kindly to Mr Collins．
　　‘Will you accept Mr Bingley's invitation，sir？And if you do，will you，as a priest，consider it right to dance？’
　　‘I shall certainly accept，and I am so far from objecting to dancing that I hope to have the honour of dancing with all my beautiful cousins．I take this opportunity of asking you，Miss Elizabeth，for the first two dances especially．’
　　She was very surprised，and rather annoyed．She had hoped that Wickham would ask her for those dances，but now she would have Mr Collins instead！She could not refuse， however，and his request also worried her in another way．His manner to her seemed particularly flattering，which gave her the unwelcome idea that perhaps she had been chosen from among her sisters to be the rector of Hunsford's wife．As she observed the increasing number of compliments he paid to her beauty and character，she felt sure that he intended to propose marriage．For the moment，however，she decided to do nothing，but wait and see．
　　On Tuesday evening，when Elizabeth entered the hall at Netherfield and looked in vain for Mr Wickham among the red coats gathered there，she was surprised and disappointed to see he was not present．She had never doubted he would come，and had dressed with more than her usual care，looking forward to winning his heart，which she knew was already partly hers．But she immediately suspected that Darcy had persuaded Bingley not to invite Wicham，and although she discovered from one of the officers that in fact Wickham had been invited，but had been called away on business，she felt sure Wickham had want- ed to avoid meeting Darcy，and blamed Darcy for this．As a re- sult，when Darcy greeted her，she was so annoyed with him that she could hardly reply politely．
　　But she soon became more cheerful，and determined to enjoy the ball in spite of Wickham's absence．Unfortunately，the first two dances，with Mr Collins，were painfully embarrassing，as her cousin had no idea how to dance，and moved extremely awkwardly．She was relieved to leave him，and have the third dance with an officer，who gave her great pleasure by talking about Wickham and his popularity in the regiment．Alter this， she was very surprised to be approached by Mr Darcy and in- vited to dance．She was so astonished，in fact，that she accepted him without thinking，and found herself standing opposite him on the dance floor．‘What an honour for me，to be allowed to dance with Mr Darcy！’she thought．They danced for some time in silence，and then she made a remark．He replied，and was silent again．After a pause，she spoke again．
　　‘Now pou must say something，Mr Darcy．You could re- mark on the size of the room，or the number of couples．’
　　He smiled．‘I’ll say whatever you wish me to say．’
　　‘Very well．That reply will do for the moment．Perhaps soon I’ll observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones．But now we can be silent．Conversation needs to be ar- ranged In this way so that those people who don't enjoy talk- ing are not required to make any effort．’
　　‘Are you referring to yourself，or are you thinking of me？’
　　‘Both，’said Elizabeth，smiling，‘because I think you and Iare similar．We're both unsociable and unwilling to speak，un- less we can astonish and impress the whole room．’
　　‘I am sure you aren't like that，’he answered．‘I cannot say whether I am，or not．You obviously think so．’
　　She said nothing．
　　‘Do you and your sisters often go to Meryton？’he contin- ued．
　　‘We do，’she replied，and，unable to resist the temptation， she added，‘When you met us there last week，we had just been introduced to someone．’
　　The effect was immediate．There was a new coldness in Dar- cy's expression．After a moment he said，with difficulty，‘Mr Wickham is so agreeable that he makes friends easily．Whether he can keep them is less certain．’
　　‘He has been unlucky enough to lose your friendship，’ replied Elizabeth sharply，‘and in a way which will cause him hardship all his life．’Darcy did not reply to this，and there was only time for a little more conversation before the dance ended．
　　Elizabeth went to find Jane，and listened with delight as she described her feelings for Bingley，and her confidence in his af- fection for her．But apart from Jane，it seemed to Elizabeth that if her family had made an agreement to appear as stupid as pos- sible during the ball，they could not have been more successful． First Mr Collins insisted on going to introduce himself to Mr Darcy，the nephew of his respected patron，and was received very coldly．Then，during supper，Mrs Bennet could not be pre- vented from talking very loudly to Lady Lucas about her great hopes of Jane's marriage to Bingley．Elizabeth blushed in em- barrassment when she realized that the Bingley sisters and Mr Darcy were able to hear．Finally，when some music was re- quired，Mary Bennet went confidently to the piano，and sang and played several songs，all rather badly．
　　The rest of the evening brought Elizabeth little amusement． She could not even go and talk to people she knew，as Mr Collins seemed determined to stay close by her side all evening． Fortunately，her good friend Charlotte Lucas occasionally gave her some relief，by kindly listening to some of Mr Collins’long speeches．At least Elizabeth did not have to talk to Mr Darcy any more．He often stood near her，quite alone，but did not come close enough to speak．
　　At the end of the evening it was obvious to Elizabeth that al- though her family had greatly enjoyed the ball，the Bingley sis- ters were eager for these particular guests to leave．Mr Collins， however，was enthusiastic in his praise of the Bingleys’hospi- tality，and Mrs Bennet invited the whole Bingley family to visit Longbourn as soon as possible．She was feeling very satisfied， convinced that in three or four months Jane would be married to Bingley．She was also sure that Elizabeth would marry Mr Collins．This was a good enough marriage for Elizabeth，who was her least favourite daughter，but not nearly as impressive as Jane's marriage to Bingley．



　　”



■ 5 Mr Collins proposes twice
　　At Longbourn the next day，soon after breakfast，Mr Collins asked Mrs Bennet for permission to speak pri- vately to Elizabeth Mrs Bennet was delighted，and hurried the other girls out of the room，so that Elizabeth and Mr Collins were left alone together．Elizabeth did not want to stay，and got up to leave，but after a moment's thought，sat down again quietly，determined to listen and reply politely．
　　‘My dear Miss Elizabeth，said Mr Collins seriously，‘this little unwillingness to hear me，this modesty of yours，can only add to your other charms．You can hardly doubt the purpose of my speech．Almost as soon as I entered the house，I chose you as the companion of my future life．But before I am carried away by my feelings，I think I should state my reasons for marrying．
　　Elizabeth was trying so hard not to laugh at the idea of Mr Collins being carried away by his feelings that she was unable to reply．
　　‘First，’he continued，‘it is right for a priest to marry，as an example to other people Secondly，I'm sure marriage will add greatly to my happiness，and thirdly，which perhaps I should have mentioned earlier，my generous patron has advised me to marry．“Find an active，useful sort of person，”she told me，“a woman who can make a small income go a long way．Bring her to Hunsford as your wife，and I’ll visit her．”So I decided to choose a wife from among my Bennet cousins，to lessen the loss to the family when the sad event of your father's death takes place．I flatter myself that you will appreciate my motives．And now，nothing remains but to convince you of the violence of my affection．I am quite indifferent to the fact that you bring little money with you into our marringe，and promise you that I shall make no ungenerous reference to this after we are married．’
　　It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now．
　　‘Sir，you forget I have given no answer．Accept my thanks for the compliment you are paying me，but it is impossible for me to accept your proposal．’
　　‘Of course I understand，’said Mr Collins，‘that young ladies often do not accept a proposal of marriage the first time． I am therefore not at all discouraged，and sincerely hope we shall be married soon．’
　　‘Sir，’cried Elizabeth，‘your hope is rather extraordinary after what I've said！I am perfectly serious．You could not make me happy，and I'm convinced I'm the last woman in the world who would make you happy．And I'm sure that if Lady Catherine knew me，she would find me poorly qualified for the situation．’
　　‘If I knew Lady Catherine thought so—’began Mr Collins，looking very worried．‘But I cannot imagine she would disapprove of you．And when I have the honour of seeing her again，I shall certainly tell her how modest，economical and practical you are．’
　　‘Indeed，Mr Collins，all praise of me will be unnecessary． Pay me the compliment of believing what I say．I hope you will be very happy and very rich，but I cannot accept your proposal．’She got up and was going to leave the room，but Mr Collins was speaking to her again．
　　‘I am far from accusing you of cruelty in refusing me，as I know it is the custom with elegant ladies in society to refuse a gentleman the first time．I hope to receive a more favourable answer next time I speak to you of marriage．’
　　‘Really，Mr Collins，’cried Elizabeth with some warmth，‘you do puzzle me！I do not know how to express my refusal so that it convinces you！’
　　‘You must allow me to flatter myself，dear cousin，that you do not intend to refuse me for long．My situation in life，my connections with the de Bourgh family，and my relationship to your own，all make my proposal a very suitable one．And you should remember that in spite of your many admirable qualities，it is not certain that you will receive any other offer of marriage，as you have very little money of your own．’
　　‘Sir，thank you again for the honour you have done me，but to accept your proposal is absolutely impossible．Can I speak plainer than that？Don't think of me as an elegant female，but as a thinking creature speaking the truth from her heart！’
　　‘You are charming！he cried，‘and I'm sure that when both your excellent parents agree，you will accept my proposal！’
　　Elizabeth did not reply，but left the room silently，deter- mined to ask her father，if necessary，to make her refusal clear to the self-deceiving Mr Collins．
　　Mrs Bennet had been waiting eagerly for the end of the in- terview，and when she saw Elizabeth leave the room，she hur- ried in to offer her congratulations to Mr Collins．He received them with pleasure，adding that he was sure his cousin's re- fusal was a natural result of her modesty and delicacy of char- acter．
　　‘Refusal？’repeated Mrs Bennet，shocked．‘Lizzy refused you？Do not worry，Mr Collins．I shall speak to her at once． She's a very obstinate，foolish girl，but I’ll make her accept you．
　　‘Pardon me，madam，’cried Mr Collins，‘but if she's really obstinate and foolish，I do not think she would be a suitable wife for a man in my situation．’
　　‘Sir，you quite misunderstand me，’said Mrs Bennet， alarmed．‘She's only obstinate in a matter like this．In every- thing else she is very agreeable．I’ll see Mr Bennet and we’ll arrange it with her，I'm sure．’
　　She did not give him time to reply，but hurried to the library，where she knew she would find her husband．
　　‘Oh，Mr Bennet，we need you urgently！We're all in such confusion！You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr Collins！’
　　Mr Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered，and stared at her with calm unconcern、‘I do not have the pleasure of understanding you，’he said．‘What are you talking about？’
　　‘Lizzy declares she won't have him，and if you don't hurry， he’ll change his mind and not have her．’
　　‘So what should I do？It seems a hopeless business．’
　　‘Speak to her about yourself．Tell her you insist on her marrying him．’
　　‘Call her in here．She shall hear my opinion．’
　　Mrs Bennet gladly rang the bell，and the servant brought Elizabeth into the library．
　　‘Come here，child，said her father as she appeared．‘I've sent for you on a very important matter．I understand that Mr Collins has made you an offer of marriage，and you have re- fused？’When Elizabeth nodded，he continued，Very well． Now，your mother insists on your accepting．Isn't that right， Mrs Bennet？’
　　‘Yes，or I’ll never see her again．’
　　‘You now have an unhappy choice to make，Elizabeth．From this day on，you must be a stranger to one of your parents． Your mother will never see you again if you do not marry Mr Collins，and I will never see you again if you do．’
　　Elizabeth could not help smiling，but Mrs Bennet，who had been sure her husband supported her，was very disappointed．
　　‘What do you mean，Mr Bennet？You promised me you would insist on her marrying him．’
　　‘My dear，’replied her husband，‘I have two small requests to make．First，that you will accept that I know what Ipromised or did not promise，and secondly，that you will all leave me in peace as soon as possible．’
　　That afternoon，Charlotte Lucas came to visit Elizabeth，and found the family still in great confusion．The younger girls were quite excited by the news of Mr Collins’proposal，and Mrs Bennet was most annoyed with Elizabeth．
　　‘Oh dear Miss Lucas，’cried Mrs Bennet，can't you per- suade Elizabeth to accept Mr Collins？Nobody else wants to help me！Oh，how ill I feel！And look at Lizzy now！She's so unconcerned！But I tell you，Miss Lizzy，if you go on refusing every offer of marriage like this，you’ll never get a husband at all！And I won't be able to provide for you when your father is dead，I warn you now．I told you in the library that I wouldn't speak to you again，and I won't．I have no pleasure in talking to an undutiful child like you．Not that I have much pleasure in talking to anybody，with my headaches．Nobody knows how I suffer！But of course those who do not complain are never pitied．’
　　Her daughters listened in silence，aware that any attempt to calm her would only increase her annoyance．Elizabeth，howev- er，was determined not to marry Mr Collins，and in the end Mrs Bennet was obliged to accept that fact．When Mr Collins realized that Elizabeth had meant what she said，his manner to- wards her became coldly and stiffly polite．His long speeches and flattering compliments were transferred for the rest of the day to kind Charlotte Lucas，who took on herself the trouble of listening to him，for which all the Bennets were very grateful．
　　The next day a letter was delivered to Jane from Netherfield Elizabeth saw her sister's expression change as she read it，and when they were alone，she asked about it．
　　‘It's from Caroline Bingley，’said Jane，‘and it has sur- prised me very much．The whole party have left Netherfield， and are on their way back to London，probably for the winter． They may not return to Netherfield at all．She says the only thing she sincerely regrets is leaving me behind in Hertford- shire，and promises！to write very frequently．’
　　Elizabeth did not trust Miss Bingley's apparent affection for Jane．‘I really don't think their departure matters very much，she said．‘Mr Bingley won't be kept in London by his sisters．I'm sure he’ll be back at Netherfield soon．’
　　‘But perhaps he prefers to stay in London，where many of his friends are．But I haven't told you everything yet．Let me read you the part which particularly hurts me—’
　　Mr Darcy is impatient to see his sister，and we confess we are also eager to see her again Nobody is more beautiful，el- egant or accomplished than Georgiana Darcy．Louisa and I have great affection for her，and hope one day to call her sis- ter．My brother admires her very much．He will have frequent opportunities of seeing her，and although I am his sister I must say I think he is most capable of winning any woman's heart．
　　‘What do you think of this，dear Lizzy？Isn't it clear enough？ Caroline doesn't wish or expect me to become her sister-in- law；she's convinced of her brother's indifference towards me， and，perhaps because she suspects my feelings for him，she （most kindly！）warns me that he's very likely to marry some- one else！’
　　‘I have a totally different opinion．Miss Bingley sees her brother is in love with you，while she wants him to marry Miss Darcy．We aren't rich enough or grand enough for them，and she is eager to have a family connection with the Darcys，so that it may be easier for her to marry Mr Darcy．So she follows her brother to London，hoping to keep him there，and tries to persuade you he doesn't care about you．But of course he's in love with you！’
　　‘I really can't agree with you about Caroline．I think she's incapable of deceiving anyone．But Lizzy，my dear sister，even if she's wrong about her brother，and he does care for me，could I be happy in accepting a man whose sisters and friends all wish him to marry someone else？’
　　‘You must decide for yourself，and if you consider it more important to do what his sisters want，than to gain the happi- ness of being his wife，I certainly advise you to refuse him．’
　　‘How can you say that？’said Jane，smiling a little．‘You know I wouldn't hesitate，although I'd be sad if they disapproved of me．But，oh dear，if he doesn't come back to Netherfield，I’ll never have to make the decision！’
　　But Elizabeth was sure Mr Bingley could not be kept away from Jane by his sisters，and soon persuaded Jane to take a more hopeful view of the situation．
　　That day the Bennets，with Mr Collins，went to dinner with the Lucas family at Lucas Lodge．Again it was Charlotte who spent most of the evening listening to Mr Collins．Elizabeth was very relieved，and thanked her friend gratefully for the trouble she was taking．But Charlotte's kindness had a particu- lar aim，which Elizabeth was unaware of．Her plan was to en- courage Mr Collins to transfer his attentions to herself．In fact， she was managing so well that，when she said goodnight to him after dinner，she would have felt sure of success if he had been staying in Hertfordshire for another week．But she did not fully appreciate the fire and independence of his character，which caused him to get up very early the next morning and escape from Longbourn House，in a great hurry to reach Lucas Lodge and throw himself at her feet．She did not keep him waiting for an answer，and the happy couple found themselves engaged as quickly as Mr Collins’long speeches would allow．
　　Charlotte's parents were delighted to agree to the marriage， and Lady Lucas began to work out，with more interest than she had ever felt before，how many more years Mr Bennet was likely to live．Charlotte herself was quite satisfied．Mr Collins， certainly，was neither sensible nor agreeable，but still he would be a husband．She did not think highly of men or of marriage， but she had always intended to marry．Although marriage might not always bring happiness，it was the only honourable way in which a well－educated woman with little income could provide a home for herself． Now twenty－seven， and lacking beauty， she felt she was lucky to have found a husband．
　　She knew，however，that Elizabeth，whose friendship she greatly valued， would be astonished and possibly disapproving． So she decided to go to Longbourn House to tell her friend the news herself． Elizabeth was indeed shocked at first， and could not help crying out in surprise， but when Charlotte explained her reasons for accepting Mr Collins， Elizabeth tried hard to understand．When the rest of the Bennet family heard the news，they were also astonished．Mrs Bennet was quite horrified， and could not stop complaining bitterly about Charlotte's wickedness， Mr Collins'stupidity and Elizabeth's obstinacy． Mr Bennet was much calmer， only saying he was pleased to discover that Charlotte， whom he used to consider quite sensible， was as foolish as his wife， and more foolish than his daugh－ter！
　　That day was Mr Collins’last at Longbourn，and he left with many speeches of thanks， as well as a promise to return very soon．Mr Bennet warned him to be careful not to offend his patron， by being absent from his duties too often，but Mr Collins，although extremely grateful for this sign of Mr Bennet's cousinly affection for him， was naturally eager to return to Hertfordshire， to see his future wife．
　　Only two weeks later he did，in fact，come back to stay at Longbourn， but spent most of his time at Lucas Lodge， making arrangements for the wedding．Mrs Bennet still felt very offended by him， but she was now becoming anxious about something even more important—Mr Bingley's continued absence． Day after day had passed with no news since the arrival of Car－ oline Bingley’ s letter． Elizabeth was now rather worried， and Jane feared the worst．Finally a second letter arrived from Caroline Bingley， and when Jane read it， she realized that all hope was over． The Bingley family were staying in London for the whole winter，and Georgiana Darcy was a frequent member of their circle． Miss Bingley boasted joyfully of this friendship， and looked forward to her brother's probable marriage to Miss Darcy．
　　Although she was deeply upset， Jane bravely tried to control her feelings．‘Do not worry，Lizzy，I shall be able to forget him in a while． I have nothing to complain of， as he made no promises to me． I just thought he cared for me， but I was wrong． Luckily， no one is hurt except myself．’
　　‘My dear Jane！’ said Elizabeth．‘You are too good．You al－ ways think the best of everybody．Now I think the worst of most people， and do not see much real value or common sense around me． Mr Bingley， for example． He may not be intending to hurt you， but misery can be caused by someone being just weak and indecisive．I'm convinced his sisters and his friend， Mr Darcy， are trying to influence him against you．Another ex－ ample is Charlotte．I can't understand how she could agree to marry such a self－important， proud， silly man！’
　　‘Dear Lizzy，’said Jane，‘we must respect Charlotte's deci－ sion．She may well be happy with Mr Collins．And as for Mr Bingley，we shouldn't expect a sociable young man to be so careful of his behaviour．Women often imagine admiration means more than it really does．’
　　‘And men want that to happen．’
　　‘I prefer to believe that I was mistaken in thinking he cared for me， and that his sisters love him and approve of his wish to marry Miss Darcy．I don't want to think badly of him or his sisters．That would be worse than anything．’
　　Elizabeth had to accept Jane's wishes， and from then on，Mr Bingley's name was seldom mentioned between them．






■ 6 Elizabeth visits Mr and Mrs Collins
　　The following Monday Mrs Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her brother and his wife， who came as usual to spend Christmas at Longbourn． Mr Gardiner was a sensible， gentlemanlike man．The Netherfield ladies would have had dif－ ficulty in believing that a man who lived by buying and selling could be so well－mannered and agreeable． Mrs Gardiner， who was several years younger than Mrs Bennet and Mrs Philips， was a pleasant，intelligent，elegant woman，and a grest favourite with her Longbourn nieces，especially the two eldest， who often stayed with her in London．
　　When Mrs Gardiner had given the presents she had brought with her， and described the newest fashions， she was obliged to listen to Mrs Bennet's complaints．
　　‘I've suffered greatly since your last visit， sister！’cried Mrs Bennet．‘Just imagine！Two of my daughters were very close to marriage—and then—nothing！I do not blame Jane， who would have got Mr Bingley if she could， but Lizzy！Oh， sister！ It is hard to think she might have been Mrs Collins by now，if she hadn't been so obstinate！The result is that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married before me． It makes me quite ill， to have such a disobedient daughter and such selfish neighbours． But your coming just now is a great comfort to me，and I am very glad to hear what you tell us，about long sleeves．’
　　Mrs Gardiner made a suitably sympathetic reply to her sister－in－law， and later that day found the opportunity to dis－ cuss the matter in more detail with Elizabeth，alone．
　　‘I am sorry for Jane，’she said kindly，‘but，Lizzy，these things happen often！A young man like Mr Bingley fre－ quently falls in love with a pretty girl， and when chance sepa－ rates them， he forgets her very quickly．’
　　‘Yes， aunt，’said Elizabeth，‘but in this case it was not chance，but the young man's interfering friends，who separated Jane and Mr Bingley． I'm sure he was violently in love with her．’
　　‘Poor Jane！She's so sensitive．I'm afraid she may not get over it for some time．Now，if it had been you，Lizzy， you would have recovered more quickly， by finding humour in the situation．But do you think I could persuade Jane to come back with us to London？ Perhaps a change of air would make her feel better．’
　　Elizabeth was extremely grateful to her aunt for this kind suggestion，and felt sure Jane would gladly agree．
　　‘I hope，’added Mrs Gardiner，‘that she will not be influenced by the hope of seeing the young man． We live in such a different part of town that it is very unlikely they will meet， unless he actually comes to see her．’
　　‘that is quite impossible，because his friend Mr Darcy would not allow him to visit so unfashionable an address！’But despite her protest，Elizabeth secretly thought that Jane might see Bingley in London and that a meeting would probably reawaken his affection for her．
　　The Gardiners stayed at Longbourn for a week，and MrsBennet made sure there was always some entertainment for her brother and sister－in－law．Whenever there was a dinner party at Longbourn House， some of the officers were always invited．Mrs Gardiner，who had noticed that Mr Wickham was a very frequent visitor and that Elizabeth spoke admiringly of him， took care to observe them both．She saw enough to make her a little anxious， and decided to speak to Elizabeth about him when they were alone．
　　‘Lizzy，’she began，‘I can see that you and Mr Wickham like each other．But I must warn you not to get seriously in－ volved with him．I admit he's a most interesting young man， but sadly he has no fortune．You are a sensible girl， and must realize that you would disappoint your father by agreeing to marry a penniless young man．’
　　‘My dear aunt， do not worry．I’ll take care of myself， and Mr Wickham too．He won't be in love with me，if I can pre－ vent it．’
　　‘Elizabeth，be serious．’
　　‘I'm sorry，aunt，I’ll try again．At present I'm certainly not in love with him．But he is by far the most agreeable man I've ever met， and if he really loved me… But I would hate to dis－ appoint my father or make any of you unhappy．I cannot promise what I will do，but I will really try to do what I think is wisest．I hope you are satisfied with that．’
　　Her aunt replied that she was， and received Elizabeth's thanks for her kind advice． Several days after this， the Gardiners returned to London， taking Jane with them．
　　The day of Mr Collins’wedding soon arrived，and Mrs Bennet had to watch Charlotte Lucas become Mrs Collins．Before the bride left Longbourn for Hunsford，however，she asked Eliza－ beth to come and visit her in her new home as soon as possible． Elizabeth could not refuse， although she did not imagine it would be an enjoyable visit．It was arranged that Elizabeth would accompany Sir William Lucas and Maria，one of his oth－ er daughters，on their intended visit to Hunsford in March．
　　A week after Jane's departure， Elizabeth received a letter from her sister， saying that she had seen Miss Bingley， and hoped to continue their friendship．Elizabeth shook her head over this．She was not surprised to hear from Jane a few weeks later that Caroline Bingley had made no further attempts to communicate with her former dear friend．Elizabeth was sad－ dened to read of Jane's disappointment， but felt more cheerful when she told herself that Jane would no longer be deceived， by the sister at least．All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over． As a punishment for him， she seriously hoped he would soon marry Mr Darcy's sister，who，according to Wickham，would make him quickly regret what he had thrown away．
　　At about this time，Elizabeth also received a letter from Mrs Gardiner， asking about Wickham， and she was able to reply quite honestly that there was no danger of her marrying him． He had transferred his affections to a Miss King， who had re－ cently inherited ten thousand pounds． Elizabeth saw exactly what was happening，but her heart had only been slightly touched，and she was able to convince herself that it was quite natural for such an agreeable young man to wish for fortune and independence．
　　January and February passed， and the time for Elizabeth's visit to Mr and Mrs Collins approached．She had improved the plan， by arranging to spend a night in London at her uncle and aunt's house，before continuing the journey into Kent． She was very much looking forward to seeing Jane，who was still stay－ ing with the Gardiners．
　　The journey seemed long to Elizabeth，because Sir William and Maria had nothing to say worth hearing．But when the coach arrived at the Gardiners house’ at lunch－time，Elizabeth was delighted to see that her sister looked as healthy and lovely as before． In a private conversation with her aunt later， howev－ er， Elizabeth discovered that Jane had been suffering from peri－ ods of depression， although she always tried bravely to appear cheerful．
　　The afternoon and evening passed only too quickly， and the next day Elizabeth and the other travellers set off again．When the coach arrived in Hunsford， they were all quite excited to see，on one side of the road，Lady Catherine's great park， which they had heard so much about． At last， on the other side， they came to the Rectory， where they were warmly wel－ comed by Mr Collins and Charlotte．
　　Elizabeth was more and more pleased she had come， when she found herself so affectionately received．She saw instantly that marriage had not changed her cousin's manners． He in－ sisted on greeting them all with formal politeness and long speeches，and showed them round the house，explaining its many good points in exhausting detail．Elizabeth could not help thinking that perhaps he was speaking particularly to her，as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him．But although everything seemed neat and comfortable， she was un－ able to please him with a sigh of regret． In fact， she wondered how Charlotte could look so cheerful， with such a companion． But whenever Mr Collins said anything of which his wife might be ashamed， which was quite often， Charlotte wisely did not appear to be listening．And when Mr Collins showed them proudly round his garden，in which he himself enjoyed working，Elizabeth admired the serious way in which Charlotte praised gardening as a most healthy exercise， and admitted en－ couraging her husband to work outdoors as much as possible．
　　Elizabeth had to confess to herself that， surprisingly，Char－ lotte really appeared to be happy．When Mr Collins could be forgotten， the house seemed very pleasant and comfortable，and from Charlotte's evident enjoyment of her home，Elizabeth supposed he must often be forgotten．
　　The visitors had only been in the house for a day when a message came form Lady Catherine，inviting them all to dinner at Rosings Park the next day． Mr Collins was delighted， and congratulated his guests on their good luck．‘I confess that I might have expected her ladyship to invite us all to drink tea at Rosings on Sunday，’he said．‘But to invite the whole party to dinner！So soon after your arrival，too！What a generous and considerate lady she is！’
　　The whole of the rest of that day and the next morning were spent discussing their visit to Rosings．This made Sir William and Maria quite nervous when the moment came to walk across the park and enter the great lady's house．Elizabeth，however， was unimpressed by what she had heard of Lady Catherine， and remained calm．
　　She was interested to see that Lady Catherine was a tall， large woman， who held herself stiffly and proudly， and received her guests with an air of disdain． She spoke loudly and decided－ ly on every matter， and was clearly convinced of her superiority over other people． Her daughter， Anne，was completely differ－ ent—a small， thin， ill－looking lady，who spoke very little， and only in a whisper．
　　The dinner was very good，and was highly praised by Mr Collins．His repeated compliments，which Elizabeth thought were embarrassing， appeared to please Lady Catherine very much． After dinner her ladyship talked continuously， giving her opinions without any fear of contradiction or even comment． She then asked Elizabeth many detailed questions about her ed－ ucation， her sisters，and her father's income．Although Eliza－ beth considered these questions extremely personal and almost rude，she answered them politely and calmly．At the end of the long evening，the visitors were driven home in Lady Catherine's carriage，while Mr Collins praised his patron for her elegance，intelligence and hospitality．
　　This visit was repeated twice a week，but there was little other entertainment in Hunsford． Elizabeth had pleasant con－ versations with Charlotte， or read books， or walked along a narrow path by Lady Catherine's park， which no one else seemed to use．It was a quiet life， but she was satisfied with it．
　　However， two weeks after her arrival in Hunsford， she heard that some visitors were coming to stay at Rosings．Lady Catherine's nephew， Mr Darcy， was expected soon， accompa－ nied by his cousin， Colonel Fitzwilliam．The next day， the two gentlemen arrived，and came almost immediately to the Rectory． Colonel Fitzwilliam was about thirty， not handsome， but very gentlemanly，and he talked pleasantly to the ladies．But Mr Darcy looked as cold and proud as ever， and after greeting Mrs Collins， spoke only a few stiffly polite words to Elizabeth． She took the opportunity of asking him if he had by any chance seen Jane in London recently， and thought he looked a little confused when he answered that he had not had that pleasure． Soon after that， the two gentlemen returned to Rosings．
　　Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners were very much admired by the ladies， who felt that he would add considerably to the enjoyment of their evenings at Rosings．But it was not until Easter Day that they received an invitation from Lady Catherine， and when they arrived in her sitting－room，it was clear that she was far more interested in her nephews than in her other guests．Colonel Fitzwilliam，however，seemed really glad to see them，and he came at once to sit beside Elizabeth．They talked so agreeably and amusingly together that Mr Darcy turned his eyes towards them and looked curiously at them several times． When her ladyship also noticed， she called loudly across the room，‘Fitzwilliam，what are you talking about with Miss Ben－ net？ Let me hear what it is．’
　　‘We're speaking of music，madam，’he said，when no longer able to avoid a reply．
　　‘Of music！Then please speak to all of us．I must have my share in the conversation，if you are speaking of music．There are few people in England，I suppose， who have more true enjoyment of music than myself，or a better natural taste． If I had ever learnt to play，I would have been a great musician． But I often tell young ladies，practice is very important．I have told Miss Bennet several times that she will never play really well unless she practises more．And she is very welcome to come to Rosings and practise on the piano in the servants’hall． She won't be in anyone's way there，I can promise her．’
　　Mr Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt’ s insensitive words． Meanwhile， Colonel Fitzwilliam had persuaded Elizabeth to play some music， and she sat down at the piano．But when she had started playing， Mr Darcy went to stand in front of the piano，where he had a good view of her face．At the end of her first piece of music， Elizabeth said，smiling，‘You intend to frighten me， Mr Darcy， by coming to listen to me？ But I'm obstinate， and won't be frightened．’
　　‘I don't think you really believe I intend to alarm you，and I've had the pleasure of knowing you long enouph to be aware that you occasionally enjoy stating opinions which are not your own．
　　Elizabeth laughed at this picture of herself，and said to Colonel Fitzwilliam，‘Your cousin will teach you not to believe a word I say．Indeed，Mr Darcy，it is very ungenerous of you to mention all my faults， and perhaps rather foolish too， because I may take my revenge， and tell things about you which your re－ lations will be shocked to hear．’
　　‘I am not afraid of you，’said Darcy，smiling．
　　‘But let me hear your accusation，’cried Colonel Fitzwilliam．‘I'd like to hear how he behaves among strangers．’
　　‘Well， prepare yourself for something very dreadful．The first time I ever saw him was at a ball in Hertfordshire， and at this ball， what do you think he did？ He danced only four dances！I'm sorry to cause you pain，but that is what hap－ pened．He danced only four dances，although gentlemen were scarce，and to my certain knowledge，more than one young lady was sitting down， waiting for a partner Mr Darcy， you must admit it．’
　　‘I had not at that time the honour of knowing anybody at the ball， apart from my own group of friends．I should perhaps have asked to be introduced， but I do not like to recommend myself to strangers．I do not find it easy to talk to people I don't know．’
　　‘You don't want to take the trouble to do it， Darcy，that’ s why！’said Colonel Fitzwilliam．
　　‘I cannot play this piano as well as some other women，’said Elizabeth，‘but I've always assumed it is my own faultbecause I don't take the trouble to practise．I know that I am capable of playing as well as anyone．’
　　Darcy smiled and said，‘You are perfectly right．You have spent your time in a much better way．No one who hears you could imagine any possible improvement．We neither of us perform to strangers．’
　　Just then Lady Catherine interrupted them，to comment on Elizabeth's playing．‘Miss Bennet would play quite well，if she had a London teacher．Of course，Anne would have been a delightful performer，if her health had allowed her to learn．’
　　Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see his reaction to Anne de Bourgh's name， but neither at that moment nor at any other could she observe any sign of love or even interest in his cousin．Lady Catherine continued to give Miss Bennet advice on her playing， but at the request of the gentlemen， Elizabeth stayed at the piano for the rest of the evening．






■ 7 Darcy proposes marriage
　　Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning， writ－ ing to Jane， while Mrs Collins and Maria were shopping in the village．She heard the doorbell ring， and knew that meant a visitor had arrived， but she was greatly surprised when Mr Darcy，and Mr Darcy only， was shown into the room．
　　He seemed astonished too，on finding her alone．‘I apologize for disturbing you，Miss Bennet．I understood that all the ladies were at home．’
　　‘Please don't apologize，Mr Darcy．I hope Lady Catherine and her daughter are well？’
　　‘Very well，thank you．’He said no more．
　　As he seemed in danger of sinking into total silence， Elizabeth had to think of something to say．She remarked， ‘How very suddenly you all left Netherfield last November， Mr Darcy！I hope Mr Bingley and his sisters were well，when you left London？’
　　‘Perfectly， thank you．’That was all the answer he gave．
　　‘I think I have heard that Mr Bingley has not much idea of ever returning to Netherfield again？’
　　‘It is probable that he will spend very little of his time there in future．He has many friends elsewhere．’
　　Elizabeth did not want to talk any longer about Mr Bingley， and，determined to leave the conversation to Mr Darcy， she remained silent． He understood， and soon began to speak again．
　　Mr Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife．’
　　‘Yes， indeed． She is one of the few sensible women who would have accepted him，although I'm not sure I consider her marrying Mr Collins as the wisest thing she ever did．She seems perfectly happy， however， and financially speaking，it's a good marriage．’
　　‘It must be very agreeable to her to be such a short distance from her own family and friends．’
　　‘A short distance，you say？It is nearly eighty kilometres！’
　　‘And what is that？Little more than half a day's journey， on a good road．Yes，I call it a very short distance．’
　　‘I would never have said Mrs Collins lived near her family，’cried Elizabeth．
　　‘That shows how much you are attached to Hertfordshire． Anywhere outside the Longbourn area would，I suppose， seem far away to you． As he spoke，he smiled a little．
　　Perhaps he supposed she was thing of Jane and Nether－ field， thought Elizabeth， and she blushed．‘ Whether the dis－ tance seems long or short depends on many circumstances．If the family’ s income is large enough to pay for frequent jour－ neys，then distance is not a problem．But Mr and Mrs Collins will not be able to afford to travel very often，despite their comfortable income．I'm certain my friend does not consider Hunsford near her family．’
　　Mr Darcy moved his chair a little towards her， and said， ‘You cannot have a right to such a very strong local attach－ment．You haven't spent your whole life at Longbourn， I am sure．
　　Elizabeth looked surprised．Experiencing a change of feeling， the gentleman moved his chair away again， took a newspaper from the table，and，glancing at it，said in a colder voice，‘Are you pleased with Kent？’They discussed Kent calmly and po－ litely for a few minutes， and were then interrupted by Char－ lotte and Maria， who had returned from the village． Mr Darcy sat a little while longer，without saying much to anybody，and then went away．
　　‘What can be the meaning of this！’said Charlotte， as soon as he had gone．‘My dear Lizzy， he must be in love with you， or he would never have visited us in this familiar way．’
　　But when Elizabeth described his silence， that did not seem likely， even to hopeful Charlotte， and they could only suppose that he had nothing better to do．In fact， from now on， both Mr Darcy and Colonel Fitzwilliam called regularly at the Rectory． It was obvious that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he en－ joyed talking to the ladies， and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in being with him， as well as by his evident admiration of her，of her former favourite，Wickham．But it was more difficult to understand why Mr Darcy came． He did not often speak， and seldom appeared interested in the conversa－ tion Even Charlotte， who observed Mr Darcy closely， was not sure whether he admired Elizabeth or not， and began to hope that perhaps her friend might marry Colonel Fitzwilliam in－ stead．
　　When she took her daily walk along the path bordering the park， Elizabeth met Mr Darcy unexpectedly more than once． This was the more surprising， because she was careful to in－ form him that it was her favourite walk， So that he could avoid meeting her．It was also strange that， although he could just have greeted her and walked on， he always thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her．She could not quite understand him．
　　But one day， as she was walking， she met Colonel Fitzwilliam， not Mr Darcy， and greeted him with a smile． They walked back to the Rectory together．
　　‘Are you leaving Kent this Sunday？’she asked．
　　‘Yes，if Darcy doesn't put it off again．’
　　‘He is fortunate to be able to arrange things as he likes．’
　　‘Well，we all want to do that，’replied Colonel Fitzwilliam．
　　‘But he is used to doing what he likes， because he is rich， and many others are poor．I，for example—I'm a younger son，you know， and won't inherit my father's fortune， so I shall never be rich or independent， like Darcy．’
　　‘Now seriously， you cannot call yourself poor．When have you ever suffered because of lack of money？’
　　‘Well，perhaps I haven't really suffered much yet．But there are difficulties．A younger son doesn't have a free choice when marrying．He cannot afford to marry a girl with no fortune．’
　　Elizabeth blushed， thinking that he might mean her， and be－ gan to talk of something else． She asked him about Darcy's sis－ ter，and mentioned that the Bingley sisters liked her very much．
　　‘Bingley—yes，I know them．Their brother is very pleasant—a great friend of Darcy’ s，’answered Colonel Fitzwilliam．
　　‘Oh， yes， Mr Darcy is extremely kind to Mr Bingley， and takes very good care of him，’said Elizabeth drily．
　　‘Yes， I believe Darcy does take care of Bingley．I'm think－ ing of a recent situation， which Darcy was telling me about on the journey here．He was congratulating himself on having saved a friend from a most foolish marriage． Of course， I'm not sure the friend was Bingley，as Darcy didn't mention the name．
　　‘Did Mr Darcy give you his reasons for interfering？’
　　‘I understood that there were some very strong objections to the lady．’
　　Elizabeth could not speak for a moment．When she was able to control her anger， she changed the conversation．As soon as they reached the Rectory， she said goodbye to Colonel Fitzwilliam，and went straight upstairs to her room．At last she could think without interruption about what he had told her． Bingley，nust have been the friend to whom Darcy was refer－ ring．She had always assumed that Darcy was involved in the plan to separate Jane and Bingley， but it now appeared that he， not Miss Bingley， was the main cause of all that Jane had suffered， and still continued to suffer．The‘very strong objec－ tions to the lady’probably consisted of having one uncle who was a country lawyer， and another who was in business in Lon－ don．There could be no possible objections to Jane herself， as she was intelligent， beautiful and charming． Nor could anyone object to Mr Bennet as a father－in－law．When Elizabeth thought of her mother， she felt a little less confident． She was still convinced，however， that Mr Darcy was interested in high－ born connections rather than character or common sense． It was this， the worst kind of pride， which had destroyed for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate， gener－ ons heart in the world．
　　Thinking about all this made Elizabeth so upset and unhap－ py that she soon had a headache．It grew so much worse in the evening， and she was so unwilling to see Mr Darcy， that she decided not to go to Rosings that evening with Mr and Mrs Collins． Instead，she stayed in the Rectory sitting－room， reread－ ing Jane's recent letters from London．She was saddened to discover that， although Jane never complained， or referred to the past，in almost every line there was a lack of cheerfulness， which Elizabeth had not noticed the first time， and which now made her rather anxious．She was relieved to think that Darcy would be leaving Rosings in two days’ time， and she herself would be with Jane in less than two weeks．Colonel Fitzwilliam would also be leaving with Darcy， but he had made it clear that he had no intention of proposing to her， so she did not intend to be unhappy about him．
　　Just then，she heard the doorbell，and wondered if it might be Colonel Fitzwilliam， come to enquire about her health． But to her astonishment she saw Mr Darcy walk into the room． In a hrried manner he began to ask how she was feeling．She answered him with cold politeness．He sat down for a few mo－ ments， and then， getting up， walked about the room． Elizabeth was surprised， but said nothing． After a silence of several min－ utes， he came towards her， with none of his usual calmness， and said，‘In vain have I struggled．It is no good．I cannot conquer my feelings． You must allow me to tell you how warmly I admire and love you．’
　　Elizabeth stared， blushed， doubted， and was silent． He con－ sidered this sufficient encouragement， and confessed all that he felt， and had felt for a long time， for her． He expressed himself well， but it was not only of love that he spoke． He also talked of his pride， and his sense of her social inferiority， which had made him struggle against his feelings for so long．
　　In spite of her dislike for him，Elizabeth appreciated what a compliment such a man's affection was， and was at first sorry for the pain he was about to receive．But soon， as she heard his references to her inferior position，she lost all pity，and became very angry．She waited patiently，however，until he had finished．He ended by describing the strength of his love for her， whicn，in spite of all his attempts， he had been unable to con－ quer with arguments of reason and common sense， and finally he asked for her hand in marriage．She could see that he had no doubt of a favourable answer， which only made her angrier．
　　‘I believe society considers it correct，in cases like this，’she replied，‘to express grateful thanks．So if I could feel grateful， I would now thank you．But I cannot—I have never wanted your good opinion of me， and I cannot accept it．I'm sorry to hurt anyone， but it has not been done deliberately， and I hope the pain will not last long．The pride which， you tell me，has long prevented the expression of your affection， can have little difficulty in conquering your feelings after this explanation．’
　　Mr Darcy， whose eyes were fixed on her face， was both an－ gry and surprised by her words．His face went pale， and he was clearly struggling to control himself． There was a dreadful pause， and then he spoke in a voice of forced calmness．
　　‘And this is all the reply I am to have the honour of expect－ ing！I might，perhaps，wish to be informed why，with so little attempt at politeness，I am rejected．’
　　‘I might as well ask why，with so evident a wish to offend and insult me， you chose to tell me that you loved me against your reason and even against your character．But even if my own feelings towards you had been favourable， do you think anything could tempt me to accept the man who has destroyed， perhaps for ever， the happiness of a most dear sister？’
　　As she said this， Mr Darcy changed colour， but he listened without trying to interrupt her as she continued．
　　‘I have every reason in the world to think badly of you．Can you deny that you were the cause of Jane's separation from Mr Bingley，and of her unhappiness？Can you deny it？’
　　‘I have no wish to deny that I did everything I could to separate them， and that I am delighted with my success． Towards my friend I have been kinder than to myself．’
　　Elizabeth treated this last remark with disdain， but its meaning did not escape her．‘But it is not only because of Jane that I dislike you． My opinion of you was decided long ago．I heard all about your character from Mr Wickham． Now， what can you have to say on this matter？ How can you defend yourself？’
　　‘You take an eager interest in that gentleman，’said Darcy， less calmly than before The colour was rising in his face．
　　‘Who can help feeling an interest in him，when we hear of the unfortunate life he has had！’
　　‘Unfortunate！’repeated Darcy contemptuously．‘Yes，unfortunate indeed．’
　　‘And it was your fault，’cried Elizabeth with energy．‘You took away his chance of a comfortable income and a good position， which you knew had been intended for him．You have left him poor， and dependent， and disappointed．You have done all this！And you can still treat the mention of his name with contempt．’
　　‘And this，’ cried Darcy， as he walked with quick steps across the room，‘is your opinion of me！Thank you for explaining it so fully．But perhaps you might not have considered these offences of mine，if your pride had not been hurt by my honest confession of my reasons for not proposing to you earlier．Perhaps I should have hidden my struggles，and flat－ tered you by pretending I had every reason to love you．But I hate disguise of any sort．Nor am I ashamed of my feelings of pride，which are very natural．Could you expect me to delight in the inferiority of your family compared to mine？’
　　Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment．
　　‘Mr Darcy， you could not have made me the offer of your hand in any possible way that would have tempted me to accept it． The moment I first met you，I noticed your pride， your sense of superiority， and your selfish disdain for the feelings of others． Later events strengthened my dislike for you．You are the last man in the world whom I could ever be persuaded to marry．’
　　‘You have said quite enough， madam．I perfectly understand your feelings．Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time，and accept my best wishes for your health and happiness．’
　　With these words he hurried out of the room， and the house． Elizabeth felt so weak that she sat down and cried for half an hour．She was so astonished to have received a proposal from Mr Darcy！His affection for her must indeed have been strong，to conquer all the objections he had to her family and position， objections which had made him prevent his friend marrying her sister． But his terrible pride， his shameless confes－ sion of what he had done to separate Jane and Bingley， and his 150cruelty towards Wickham soon removed any pity she might have felt for him．






■ 8 Elizabeth Learns more about Darcy and Wickham
　　The next morning Elizabeth had still not recovered from the surprise of Darcy's proposal to her．Feeling in need of exercise and fresh air， she decided to have a walk． In order to avoid meeting Mr Darcy， she kept away from her favourite path， but could not resist walking a little way into Lady Catherine's park． There she was astonished to see Darcy him－self approaching her and calling her name．
　　‘I have been walking some time in the hope of meeting you，’he said．‘Will you do me the honour of reading this let－ter？’And， handing her an envelope， he bowed slightly and walked quickly away．With no expectation of pleasure， but with the strongest curiosity， Elizabeth opened the letter， and began to read it as she continued her walk alone．
　　Do not be alarmed，madam，that I shall repeat the offer which so disgusted you last night．I have no intention of mentioning again wishes which， for the happiness of both of us， cannot be too soon forgotten．I would not have written， but justice re－quires my character to be defended．
　　You accused me last night of two very different offences．The first was that I had separated Mr Bingley from your sister，in spite of their mutual affection，and the second was that I had destroyed Mr Wickham's chance of future wealth and happiness， in spite of my father's honourable promises to him．I hope that you will no longer blame me for either of these offences， when you have read the explanation which follows．If I am forced to describe feelings which offend you， I can only say I am sorry．
　　I had not been long in Hertfordshire before I noticed that Bingley preferred your elder sister Jane to any other young woman．But I had often seen him in love before，and it wasn't until the Netherfield ball that I realized how serious his at-tachment was．I was careful to observe your sister closely，and as her manners and appearance were as pleasant and cheerful as ever， I remained convinced that she did not feel strongly about him．I was perhaps deceived by her calmness，and in that case， your anger has not been unreasonable． But I sincerely believed that her heart had not been touched．I ob－jected to Bingley's possible marriage to her， not only for those reasons of social inferiority that I mentioned to you last night，but also for reasons which in my case I had tried to for－get， but which I must state now．The behaviour that evening of your mother， your three younger sisters， and occasionally even your father，was so lacking in social correctness that I made up my mind to save my friend from what I considered would be a most unhappy marriage．If you are upset by my description of your family's faults， it may comfort you to con-sider that you and your elder sister have avoided any share of blame，and deserve nothing but honourable praise for your behaviour．To continue—when I was in London， with the help of Bingley's sisters， who shared my opinion，I explained to him the disadvantages of marriage to your sister．This alone would not have been enough to prevent the marriage，if I had not also been able to convince him of your sister's indiffer－ence to him．Then it was easy to persuade him not to return to Hertfordshire．I do regret one thing， however．Miss Bingley and I both knew that your sister was in London， but we hid the fact from Bingley．In this I consider I was less than honest， but I have no other apology to offer．
　　Your other， more serious accusation refers to Mr Wickham．Here again I may cause you pain—only you can tell how much．In order to show you his real character I must explain the whole of his connection with my family．His late father worked for mine for many years， helping to look after the Pemberley farms．His son， George Wickham， received much kindness from my father， who paid for him to go to school and to university．My father hoped the young man would enter the Church．If he became a priest， I was to give him the post of rector in a village near Pemberley， when it became vacant．But even before my father died， I had discovered Wickham's weakness of character and lack of morals．After my father's death，Wickham wrote to inform me that he did not intend to enter the Church， and asked for an amount of money instead of the post of rector．I knew that，with his character faults，he ought not to become a priest， and I therefore agreed at once．The business was soon arranged．He resigned all claim to the church post， and accepted three thousand pounds instead．I hoped that I would not see him or hear form him again．But three years later he wrote again，this time to ask for the rec－tor's post， informing me that his money had all gone and his situation was desperate．You will hardly blame me for refus－ing．Since then he has doubtless been violent in accusing me of injustice to all who will listen to him．
　　There is one more circumstance which I would like to for-get myself，but which I must now mention．I rely on your keep－ing this confidential．A year ago，I sent my sister，who is ten years younger than I am， on holiday to Ramsgate in Kent， in the care of a female companion．Unfortunately， there was an understanding between this woman and Mr Wickham，who also went to Ramsgate．With her help and encouragement， he spent a great deal of time with Georgiana， and flattered her so much that she believed she was in love， and agreed to elope with him．She was only fifteen at the time，and I am glad to say that she confessed everything to me immediately，when I arrived unexpectedly in Ramsgate just before their planned elopement Naturally，I dismissed the companion，and wrote to Wickham， who left the place at once．He was doubt-less most interested in my sister's fortune， which is thirty thousand pounds， but I cannot help supposing that he was also eager to revenge himself on me．I hope you will now clear me of all blame in this matter．
　　If，madam，you doubt the truthfulness of my description of these circumstances， I suggest you speak to Colonel Fitzwilliam． As my cousin and close friend， he knows every detail of these events，and will be happy to support what I say．
　　I will only add，may God be with you．
　　Fitzwilliam Darcy
　　Elizabeth experienced a variety of emotions as she read the let－ter．She was astonished to discover that Darcy was capable of any sort of apology．It was with a strong prejudice against any－thing he might say that she began reading his explanation of what had happened at Netherfield， and at first she was too an－gry with him to treat him with justice．But when she went on to read his description of his relationship with Wickham， she hesitated．It was so very different from Wickham's story，which she would have preferred to believe． But after a few mo-ments'thought she realized that Darcy's statement was much more likely to be true． She began to remember several things about Wickham which now appeared strange to her．On the first evening she had met him， he had told the whole story about his lost fortune and the Darcy family to her，a total stranger． Then he had boasted of having no fear of Darcy， but had avoided the Netherfield ball the very next week．In addi－tion， he had waited until the Bingleys and Darcy had left Netherfield before making his accusations public． She reminded herself that no one in Hertfordshire knew anything about Wickham's past，so it was quite possible that he lacked morals， as Darcy said． She had to admit that Darcy himself，though horribly proud， had always shown himself to be a gen-tleman． Finally， Darcy would certainly not have dared to refer her to Colonel Fitzwilliam，if he were not certain that his cousin could prove these statements．
　　She became absolutely ashamed of herself．‘How badly I have behaved！’she cried．‘How prejudiced I have been， I who have always been so proud of my ability to judge people！ That pride has led me blindly into making a stupid mistake．Flattered by Wickham's interest， and offended by Darcy's coolness，I have misjudged both of them．Till this moment， I never knew myself．’
　　She re－read what Darcy had to say about Jane， and this time was forced to admit that Jane had displayed few outward signs of her feelings for Bingley．Charlotte had even commented on it．Then when Elizabeth looked again at Darcy's comments on her family's behaviour， her sense of shame was very great， and she could not deny the justice of his words．Feeling more mis－erable than she had ever felt before，she slowly returned to the Rectory， where she had difficulty in maintaining a cheerful ap－pearance．
　　Mr Darcy and Colonel Fitzwilliam left Rosings the next day，and were sadly missed by their aunt， who now had so little entertainment that she invited the Collinses and their visitors several times that week． As Elizabeth only had a few days left before the end of her visit， she thought it fortunate that most of her time was occupied． When she had a moment to herself， it was a great relief to walk outside in the garden or the park，alone with her thoughts． She soon knew Mr Darcy's letter by heart． Although she was still angry with him for the proud，over－confident way in which he had proposed， her anger turned against herself when she considered how unjustly she had criti－cized and accused him．She respected his character and felt pity for his disappointment，but did not for a moment regret her re－fusal， or have the slightest desire to see him ever again．
　　She was saddened when she thought of her family．Her fa-ther enjoyed laughing at Kitty's and Lydia's foolishness so much that he never attempted to control his two youngest daughters，and her mother，whose own behaviour was far from correct，was completely unaware that anything was wrong．And poor Jane！It now appeared that Bingley's affection had been sincere， and Jane's disappointment had been indirectly caused by the behaviour of her own near relations．
　　On Saturday morning Elizabeth said goodbye to her friend Charlotte， feeling sorry to leave her with such a husband． But Charlotte， although regretting the departure of her visitors， appeared quite content with her domestic arrangements． Mr Collins took care to say to Elizabeth， before she left，‘I do hope，my dear Miss Elizabeth， that you will be as happy in marriage as I am．My dear Charlotte and I have one mind and one way of thinking．We seem to be made for each other．’
　　‘It is most fortunate when that is the case，’was all that Elizabeth could safely reply．
　　By midday she had arrived in London，where she had ar－ranged to stay a few days at her aunt's house．There was，how-ever， no opportunity to discuss Mr Darcy's letter with Jane，until they both reached Longbourn again， at the end of the week．
　　It was pleasant to be at home again，but Elizabeth was very conscious of her younger sisters'silliness．They were full of the sad news they had just heard， that the regiment was leaving Meryton in two weeks’ time and would be staying for the summer in Brighton， a holiday town on the south coast．Lydia and her mother were trying hard to persuade Mr Bennet to take them to Brighton too， for several months， as the summer would be so miserable in Hertfordshire without the officers．Fortunately，Elizabeth felt sure her father would not agree to this foolish idea．
　　When she and Jane were alone，she told her sister about Darcy's proposal of marriage．Jane was astonished，but soon her sisterly feelings made her think it quite natural， and her kind heart felt pity for Darcy's disappointment． However，when she heard about George Wickham's wickedness，as ex-plained in Darcy's letter， she was deeply shocked．After some discussion， the sisters decided not to tell anyone what they knew about Wickham， as he would soon be leaving Meryton in any case．
　　Elizabeth felt greatly relieved by this conversation．She had got rid of two of her secrets， and was certain of a willing listen-er in Jane， whenever she might wish to talk again of either． But she dared not tell the third，and explain to Jane how sincere Bingley's feelings for her had been． She could see that Jane was not happy，because of her continued warm affection for Bingley． However， there seemed little chance of Bingley marry-ing her now， and Elizabeth did not want to deepen Jane's feel－ings of regret for her lost happiness．






■ 9 Elizabeth in Derbyshire
　　During the week before the regiment's departure， all the young ladies in the Meryton area became extremely de-pressed．Only the two elder Miss Bennets were still able to eat，drink， sleep and lead a normal life．They were often scolded by Kitty and Lydia， who could not understand such hard-heartedness．
　　‘How shall we manage without the officers！’ they cried miserably．‘How can you smile like that，Lizzy？’
　　Their affectionate mother shared all their sadness．‘I re－member when Colonel Millar's regiment went away， twenty-five years ago，’she said，‘I thought my heart was broken．’
　　‘I'm sure mine will be broken，’said Lydia．
　　‘If we could only go to Brighton！’said Mrs Bennet．‘I'm certain a little sea－bathing would be good for me．’
　　‘Oh yes！ But Papa is so disagreeable about it．’
　　Elizabeth tried not to listen， but could not help seeing the justice of Darcy's objections to her family．
　　But soon Lydia's bitterness changed to absolute delight，when she received an invitation from Colonel Forster's wife， to accompany her to Brighton with the regiment． Mrs Forster was a very young woman， only recently married， and as cheerful and sociable as Lydia， witn whom she had been friendly for two months． Poor Kitty was very upset at not being included in the invitation， but Lydia cared nothing for her sister's feelings． She ran wildly through the house， calling for everyone's congratulations， and laughing and talking more loudly than ever．
　　Elizabeth could not share her sister's happiness， and felt it was her duty to advise her father secretly to refuse permission for Lydia to go．But she could not convince him that Lydia would be in any real danger， and so all the arrangements were made for her sister's departure． Elizabeth thought her father was wrong，however， and was still worried about how Lydia would behave in an atmosphere of greater freedom， and among the temptations of a fashionable seaside town like Brighton．
　　Elizabeth had seen Mr Wickham regularly since her return from Kent， at family parties and visits． She no longer thought him so agreeable． As the rich Miss King had left Meryton to stay with her uncle， Mr Wickham appeared eager to transfer his affections back to Elizabeth． His confidence in his own charm and ability to please annoyed Elizabeth very much， so that when she met him for the last time before the regiment’ s departure， she spoke quite coldly to him． In reply to a polite question of his about her Hunsford visit， she could not stop herself mentioning her frequent meetings with Mr Darcy， and her favourable opinion of that gentleman's character． Wickham looked a little embarrassed，and made no further attempt to charm Elizabeth．They separated at last with mutual politeness， and possibly a mutual desire never to meet again．
　　When Lydia left for Brighton， Elizabeth had to put up with Mrs Bennet's and Kitty's constant complaints that Longbourn had become very dull． Fortunately， she was able to look for-ward to a trip which she would soon be taking with Mr and Mrs Gardiner．They had planned to visit the Lake District，but Mrs Gardiner had recently written to say that as her husband's business made it necessary to shorten their holiday to three weeks， they would not have time to visit the whole of the Lake District comfortably．Instead，she suggested visiting Derbyshire， an area with a particularly strong attraction for her， as she had spent a large part of her early life there．Eliza-beth was disappointed， but accepted the new plan at once．Al-though it was impossible to hear of Derbyshire without think－ing of Pemberley and its owner， she felt sure she could avoid meeting Mr Darcy there．
　　Four weeks later， Mr and Mrs Gardiner arrived at Long-bourn，where they had arranged to leave their children in Jane's care．The next day they set out with Elizabeth on their journey．The three of them made excellent travelling compan－ions，sharing an intelligent interest in the people and places they saw on their way， and a strong affection for each other．After visiting Oxford， Blenheim， Warwick， Kenilworth and Birmingham， they arrived in Derbyshire， and decided to stay in the small town of Lambton， where Mrs Gardiner had lived be-fore her marriage． Elizabeth discovered that Mr Darcy's house，Pemberley，was only eight kilometres away from Lambton．
　　‘I often used to go to Pemberley when I was younger，’said Mrs Gardiner．‘Wouldn't you like to see it，Lizzy？ We could go tomorrow．It's a beautiful place．Wickham spent his youth there， you know．’
　　‘I—I am rather tired of large country houses，aunt，’said Elizabeth，forced to pretend．How dreadful it would be to meet Mr Darcy， while viewing his house！But when she asked a servant at the hotel one or two careful questions that evening， she was told that Mr Darcy was not at home at the moment．Greatly relieved， she felt able to agree to her aunt's sugges-tion， when it was repeated the next morning， and Mr Gardiner ordered a carriage immediately．
　　In a short time they entered the gates of Pemberley park，and drove through an extensive and beautiful wood．At the top of a hill they had their first view of Pemberley House，situated on the other side of a valley， with a line of high， wooded hills behind． The house was a large，handsome， stone building，which appeared to fit naturally into the scenery．Mr and Mrs Gardiner were warm in their admiration， and Elizabeth was de-lighted．At that moment she felt that to be mistress of Pember－ley might be worthwhile！
　　They drove up to the front door， and asked to be allowed to visit the house．The Pemberley housekeeper，a respectable，el－derly woman，showed them round．All the rooms were of a good size， and elegantly yet sensibly furnished．From every window there was an attractive view．Elizabeth began to admire the owner's taste in everything she saw．
　　‘And I might have been mistress of this place！’she thought．‘Instead of viewing these rooms as a stranger， I might be welcoming my uncle and aunt as visitors．But no，’she sud－denly remembered， ‘that could never be．I wouldn't have been able to invite my uncle and aunt，or any other of my vulgar family connections．’This was a lucky thought， which saved her from something like regret．
　　She longed to enquire of the housekeeper whether her mas-ter were really absent， but luckily her uncle asked the question instead．It was quite alarming to hear that Mr Darcy was ex－pected to arrive the next day， with a large group of friends．How glad Elizabeth was that their own journey had not been delayed a day！
　　Mr and Mrs Gardiner were enjoying their conversation with the housekeeper， who seemed content to talk about her master．
　　‘Mr Darcy is a very handsome gentleman， as you will see from the painting upstairs．His sister is most attractive too，and so accomplished！She plays and sings the whole day．My master has just sent a new piano from London for her． He's such a kind brother，he’ll do anything for Miss Georgiana．’
　　‘Does Mr Darcy spend much time at Pemberley？’asked Mr Gardiner．
　　‘Not as much as I'd like， sir．’
　　‘If your master married，he might spend more time here！’
　　‘Yes，sir， but I don't know when that’ll be． I don't know who is good enough for him．’Mr and Mrs Gardiner smiled，and Elizabeth listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper continued．‘It's no more than the truth．Every-body who knows him says the same． He's never spoken a cross word to me， and I've known him since he was a baby． Some people call him proud， but I've never seen any of that． He's the best master that ever lived．’
　　Elizabeth almost stared at her．‘Can this be Mr Darcy？’she wondered．This was the most extraordinary praise for the man she had always thought so disagreeable and proud， especially with people he considered inferior to himself．She longed to hear more， but now the housekeeper was leading them upstairs．Soon Elizabeth found herself in front of the painting of Mr Darcy．He was smiling at her， just as she remembered him smiling sometimes when he looked at her． She looked at the picture silently for several minutes before going downstairs with the others．At that moment Elizabeth certainly felt more warmly towards Mr Darcy than at any time since their first meeting．She was beginning to realize that she had underestimated his character． His housekeeper's opinion of him was totally favourable， and what praise is more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant？ As she stood in front of his picture， she gratefully remembered the warmth of his feelings for her， and began to forget the way in which he had expressed them．
　　As they had now seen all the rooms which were open to the public， the housekeeper called the gardener， who was going to show them the park and gardens．They were just walking away from the house， when Elizabeth turned to have one last look，and saw the owner of Pemberley come suddenly forward from behind the house．
　　They were within twenty metres of each other， and Eliza-beth could not avoid his seeing her．Their eyes instantly met，and they both blushed． He appeared very surprised， but， recov-ering quickly，approached and spoke to Elizabeth，if not calmly， at least with perfect politeness． Astonished and con-fused，she received his greetings with embarrassment．Soon he could find no more to say， and left her to return to the house．Mr and Mrs Gardiner， who had been watching from a distance， expressed their admiration of his appearance， but Eliz-abeth could only think of her feelings． How unfortunate that she had come！She blushed again．It might seem as if she had planned this meeting with him．And his behaviour was so different！ Never before had she heard him speak so politely and so gently．What could it mean？
　　Her head full of these thoughts， she joined her uncle and aunt in their walk through the gardens．They were walking slowly beside an attractive stream， when they noticed Mr Dar-cy coming towards them． This time Elizabeth was able to con-trol herself better， and she returned his greetings politely． She hid a smile when he asked her to do him the honour of intro－ducing him to her friends， as she felt sure he was not expecting the well－mannered Gardiners to be some of her low－born rela－tions．He certainly seemed surprised when she introduced her uncle and aunt， but took care to talk for some time to Mr Gar－diner， with every appearance of interest．Elizabeth was delight－ed that these relations，at least，could not be criticized for their poor behaviour or lack of intelligence．On their way back to the house，Mr Darcy walked beside Elizabeth．There was a short si-lence before she spoke．
　　‘Your housekeeper informed us you would not arrive until tomorrow，so I had not expected to find you here．’
　　‘It is true．I came early on business．The rest of the party will be here tomorrow．Among them are Mr Bingley and his sisters， whom you know．’He continued after a pause，‘And there is one other person who particularly wishes to meet you．Will you allow me，or do I ask too much， to introduce my sister to you？’
　　Surprised but flattered by this great compliment，Elizabeth gave her permission． When they arrived at the house， Mr Darcy offered them some refreshment，but they politely refused．Mr Darcy helped the ladies into the carriage，and as it drove away from Pemberley，Elizabeth watched him walking slowly back towards the house．Mr and Mrs Gardiner were loud in their praise of him， but Elizabeth said very little．
　　The very next morning Mr Darcy brought his sister to visit Elizabeth and the Gardiners at the hotel in Lambton．Mr and Mrs Gardiner were astonished by the honour they were receiving， but Elizabeth's obvious embarrassment， and Darcy's haste in making the visit so immediately， soon provided them with an explanation．They observed their niece and Darcy care－fully during the visit， and could not doubt that the gentleman was in love， although they were not certain of the lady's feel－ings．
　　Elizabeth was delighted to discover that Georgiana Darcy，far from being proud，as Wickham had said，was just very shy，with quiet，gentle manners．It was clear that she greatly ad－mired her brother，and had every intention of liking Miss Ben－net，as Darcy had spoken of her so favourably．Elizabeth was al-so satisfied to see that Bingley，who was with the Darcys，did not seem particularly interested in Georgiana， in spite of Caro－line Bingley's wishes．And she had to admit that she had never seen Mr Darcy behaving so sociably and pleasantly，not only to herself， but also to the relations to whom he had referred with such disdain during that last conversation in Hunsford Rectory．Elizabeth herself was more than usually anxious to make herself agreeable to everybody， and she succeeded， be－cause Bingley was ready， Georgiana was eager， and Darcy de－termined，to be pleased．
　　Miss Darcy， encouraged by her brother， invited Elizabeth and the Gardiners to dinner at Pemberley in two days'time，and when this invitation had been accepted， the Darcys and Mr Bingley left， with many warm expressions of politeness on both sides．Mr and Mrs Gardiner were very curious about their niece's feelings for Mr Darcy， but were careful not to question her．
　　That evening Elizabeth lay awake for two whole hours，try－ing to understand how she felt about him．She now thought of him with respect and a certain admiration， and was deeply grateful to him， not only for having once loved her， but for still loving her enough to forgive her bitter rejection of him， as well as all her unjust accusations． The change she had noticed， in a man who was once so proud，must be caused by his love for her．Now， since she was almost sure that if she wanted，she could encourage him to propose to her again， she only had to decide how far she wished to be involved in his future happi－ness，in which she already felt a real interest．






■ 10 Lydia and Wickham
　　On the third morning of her visit to Lambton， Elizabeth received two letters from Jane．The first had been bad－ly addressed and sent elsewhere， then redirected．Her aunt and uncle were out walking，so she sat down to read them at once．The first had been written five days before，and started just as expected， with a description of Longbourn dinner parties and visits， but the second half of this letter was dated a day later，and was evidently written in a great hurry．This is what it said：
　　Since writing the above，dear Lizzy，something most unex－pected and serious has happened But do not wish to alarm you， we are all well．It concerns poor Lydia．An express letter came at midnight last night， when we were all in bed， from Colonel Forster， to inform us that she had run away to Scot－land with one of his officers，with Wickham， in fact！There，of course， she can marry without her parents’approval．Imagine our surprise．What a foolish marriage for both of them！But at least he is not interested in her money， as he must know my father can give her almost nothing．Kitty admits that she knew about Lydia's attachment to Wickham，from Lydia's letters．Our poor mother is very upset．I must finish now，as I cannot stay away from her for long．I hope you can read this．I hardly know what I have written．
　　Without allowing herself time to think， Elizabeth opened the second letter， dated a day later， and read impatiently：
　　My dearest sister，
　　I am so confused I cannot write properly．I have bad news for you．Foolish though a marriage between Mr Wickham and our poor Lydia might be，we are now only too anxious to hear that it has taken place． There is reason to fear they have not gone to Scotland．Colonel Forster arrived here yesterday．He tells us that one of the Officers， a close friend of Wickham，believes that Wickham never intended to go to Scotland，or to marry Lydia at all．The colonel followed the couple as far as London， but they have not been seen leaving the capital．Our anxiety， my dear Lizzy，is very great．My father and mother believe the worst， and the colonel fears Wickham is not a man to be trusted，but I cannot believe him to be so wicked．And is Lydia so completely lacking in morals，that she could live with a man without being married？Impossible．Now my poor mother is really ill，my father is angry， for perhaps the first time in his life， and Kitty is being scolded for keeping the attachment a secret．While I am glad，dearest Lizzy， that you have been spared some of the confusion and worry we have been experiencing， I cannot help begging you all to come home as soon as possible．My father is going to London with the colonel to try to find Lydia．I think he is too upset to achieve results in the best and safest way，and my uncle's advice and help would be everything in the world．I rely on his goodness．
　　‘Oh！Where，where is my uncle？’cried Elizabeth，running to the door．But just as she reached it， Mr Darcy came in．Her pale face and strange manner prevented him from speaking， and she， who could think of nothing except Lydia， said hurriedly，‘Excuse me，but I must leave you．I must find Mr Gardiner immediately．There is not a moment to lose．’
　　‘Good God！ What is the matter？’he cried，then added，‘Let me， or let the servant，go to find Mr and Mrs Gardiner．You are not well enough．You cannot go yourself．’
　　Elizabeth hesitated， but her legs were trembling， and she re－alized he was right． After giving the servant her message， she sat down，looking so ill that Darcy could not leave her，or stop himself saying gently，‘Let me call someone to look after you．Shall I get you a glass of wine？You are very ill．’
　　‘No，thank you，’she replied．‘I am quite well．I am only upset by some dreadful news I've just received form Long－bourn．’She burst into tears， and for a few minutes could not speak another word．Darcy watched her miserably， in sympa－thetic silence． At last， she spoke again．‘It cannot be hidden from anyone． My youngest sister has eloped， with——with Mr Wickham． You know him too well to doubt what will happen．She has no money， no connections， nothing that can tempt him to marry her．She is lost for ever． And I could have prevented it！ I knew how bad his character was．If only I had told my family what I knew about him！ But it is all too late now．’
　　Darcy looked at her in astonishment．‘I am shocked，’he said，‘and sad， very sad．What has been done to find her and bring her back？’
　　‘My father has gone to London， and I hope my uncle will go too．We shall leave Lambton，I hope， in half an hour．But I know very well that nothing can be done．How can such a man be persuaded？ How can we even find them？ I have not the smallest hope．It is horrible！’
　　Darcy made no answer．He was walking up and down with a serious， thoughtful expression on his face． Elizabeth soon ob-served and instantly understood it．She was losing her influence over him．This proof of moral weakness in her family was driv－ing him away from her．Never before had she so honestly be-lieved she could have loved him， as now， when mutual affection must be impossible．
　　But she could not think for long of herself， when Lydia's situation was so desperate．Mr Darcy left almost immediately，politely regretting that Elizabeth and her aunt and uncle would not，in the circumstances， be able to come to dinner at Pember－ley that day， and again expressing his sympathy．When Mr and Mrs Gardiner entered the room，Elizabeth hurriedly explained everything to them， and was greatly relieved when they agreed to leave at once，to return to Longbourn．
　　Their packing was done at great speed，and soon they were in the carriage， driving south．
　　‘Lizzy， ’began Mrs Gardiner， ‘I cannot believe that Wick-ham's character is so bad that he would run away with Lydia，and not marry her．Do you really think he is capable of that？’
　　‘My dear aunt，Jane and I both know that he has neither honesty nor honour．He has falsely accused Mr Darcy， and has lied wickedly about the whole Darcy family．You saw what a shy，gentle girl Miss Darcy．is，but he had described her as proud，disagreeable and disdainful．’
　　‘But does Lydia know nothing of this？’
　　‘Oh，no！That is the worst of all．I didn't know the truth myself until my visit to Kent， and when I returned， and told Jane， she and I decided not to make our knowledge public． Now I know that was a mistake． I never thought that Lydia could be in any danger from him．’
　　When they arrived at Longbourn，Elizabeth and her aunt were able to help Jane in looking after the children．They also attempted to calm Mrs Bennet，who，however，refused to be calmed， and blamed everyone except herself for the disaster．
　　‘If only I had been allowed to take the family to Brighton，this would not have happened．Poor dear Lydia had no one to take care of her．Why did those Forsters ever let her go out of their sight？ I am sure they neglected her．Of course， I did not want her to go to Brighton， but nobody took any notice of me，as usual．And now Mr Bennet has gone to London，and I'm sure he’ll fight Wickham，and then he’ll be killed，and then the Collinses will turn us out of the house，before he's cold in his grave！’
　　‘Do not worry，sister，’said Mr Gardiner kindly．‘I'm go- ing to London tomorrow，to help my brother-in-law．’
　　‘Oh，thank you，my dear brother，’replied Mrs Bennet．‘Make sure you find Lydia and Wickham，and if they are not married yet，make them marry．And tell Lydia，they mustn’ t wait for wedding clothes，but she shall have as much money as she wants to buy them，after they are married．And keep Mr Bennet from fighting—tell him what a dreadful state I am in， so ill that I can get no rest by night or by day．And tell Lydia not to buy any clothes until she's seen me，because she doesn't know the best shops．Oh，brother，how kind you are！I hope you will manage everything．’
　　The next day Mr Gardiner travelled to London，as he had promised．Now began a painful period of waiting for those left at Longbourn．They became even more anxious，as news came from Meryton of Wickham's lies，debts，and secret attach- ments to most of the servant girls in the town．Everybody de- clared that he was the wickedest young man in the world，and protested that they had always distrusted his great charm and appearance of goodness．Although Elizabeth did not believe half of these stories，she believed enough to feel sure that her sister's reputation was already lost，and even Jane almost despaired of receiving good news．
　　In a few day's time they were relieved to receive a letter from Mr Gardiner，but unfortunately it only informed them that Wickham and Lydia had not yet been found．Apparently Wickham had left gambling debts of over a thousand pounds behind him in Brighton．Mr Bennet was returning home the following day，leaving his brother-in-law in London to continue the search．When she heard this，Mrs Bennet did not show as much satisfaction as her children expected，considering the anxiety she had previously expressed for her husband's safety．
　　‘What，is he coming home without poor Lydia？’she cried． ‘And who will fight Wickham，and make him marry her？’
　　Mrs Gardiner took the opportunity of Mr Bennet's return to go back to London herself，with her children．She was still longing to know how Flizabeth's relationship with Darcy had developed，but Elizabeth had not once mentioned his name，so her aunt did not dare to ask any direct questions．
　　When Mr Bennet arrived home，he appeared as calm as ever， but in a conversation with Elizabeth he admitted that he felt to blame for Lydia's elopement．
　　‘I know I should have had more control over her，’he said． ‘And，Lizzy，you were right．I should never have let her go to Brighton．’
　　Kitty，who was listening，said，‘Papa，if I ever went to Brighton，I'd behave much better than Lydia has done．’
　　‘You go to Brighton！’cried her father．‘I would not trust you within twenty kilometres of the place，for fifty pounds！ No，Kitty，I have at last learnt to be cautious，and you will feel the effects of it．No officer may ever enter the house again，or even pass through the village．And balls will be absolutely for- bidden，unless you dance only with your sisters．’
　　Kitty，taking these threats seriously，began to cry．
　　‘Well，well，’said he，‘don't make yourself unhappy．If you are a good girl for the next ten years，I’ll take you to the the- atre at the end of that time．’
　　Two days later，the news for which they had all been wait- ing so anxiously arrived．Mr Gardiner's letter informed them that Wickham and Lydia had been found，but that they were not married．However，certain financial arrangements had been made with Wickham．Mr Bennet was asked to pay Lydia one hundred pounds a year，as well as arranging for her to inherit her equal share of the five thousand pounds which the Bennet girls would inherit after their parents'death．If these reason- able conditions were agreed，Wickham had promised to marry Lydia．
　　At first Elizabeth and Jane were delighted that their sister's reputation would be saved through marriage，even to such a man as Wickham．But then their father explained that Wick- ham would never have agreed to marry Lydia，unless he had been paid a considerable amount of money immediately．They began to worry that it would be difficult to repay Mr Gardiner，who must have bribed Wickham in this way．Mrs Bennet，however，had no such worries．
　　‘He is her own uncle，after all！’she cried happily．‘Why shouldn't he pay？My dear，dear Lydia！Married at sixteen！ How I long to see her，and dear Wickham too！But the wed- ding clothes！I’ll write to my sister-in-law about them at once！I'm so happy．In a short time I’ll have a daughter mar- ried．Mrs Wickham！How well it sounds！’
　　Now that Lydia was going to be married，Elizabeth greatly regretted telling Darcy of her fears for her sister．But even if Lydia had been married in the most honourable way，it was ex- tremely unlikely that Mr Darcy would wish to connect himself with a family in which there was a close relationship with Wickham，the man he most justly disliked．She could not ex- pect him to go on caring for her，as she felt certain he had done when they met in Derbyshire．But now that she was sure he could not love her，she was convinced they could have been happy together．He seemed to be exactly the man who would have suited her．They could have usefully influenced each other．His mind might have been softened and his manners im- proved by her sociability，and she might have learnt from his greater judgement and knowledge of the world．But no such re- lationship could now teach an admiring world what happiness in marriage was really like．Instead，Wickham would marry Lydia，with little chance of happiness for either of them．
　　Mr and Mrs Gardiner had arranged for Lydia to be married quietly in London，from their house．At first Mr Bennet had refused to allow his youngest daughter ever to enter his house again，but eventually Jane and Elizabeth persuaded him to re- ceive Lydia and her husband after the wedding．It would only be a short visit，as almost immediately she and Wickham would be moving north to Newcastle，where he had accepted a new army post．
　　When the carriage containing the young couple arrived at Longbourn House，the two elder Bennet sisters were shocked to see how unashamed Lydia was．She entered the house，laughing and joking，and asked all her sisters to congratulate her．Wick- ham was no more embarrassed than she was，and spoke to ev- eryone in his usual flattering，agreeable manner．They seemed to have no idea of the anxiety they had caused by their shame- less and wicked behaviour．
　　Elizabeth was quite disgusted by their relaxed，confident ap- pearance，and determined not to show any interest when Lydia insisted on describing every detail of her wedding day．She could not help reacting with astonishment，however，when Ly- dia let slip the name of Mr Darcy．He had apparently been pre- sent at the ceremony．Why would Mr Darcy，Elizabeth won- dered，attend the wedding of two people he must hold in the greatest contempt？She could not discover the reason from Ly- dia，who suddenly remembered it was supposed to be a secret， and she could not rest without knowing the truth，so she hur- riedly sent a note to her aunt in London，asking urgently for an explanation．






■ 11 Bingley returns to Netherfield
　　Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving a reply from her aunt in the shortest time possible．She sat down ea- gerly to read it．
　　My dear niece，
　　I must confess I am astonished by your request for informa- tion about Mr Darcy's share in arranging Lydia's marriage．I assumed that you would know all about it．Your uncle is as surprised as I am．But if you are really innocent and ignorant， I must tell you all the details．On the day I returned to London from Longbourn，your uncle had a most unexpected visitor．Mr Darcy came to tell us he had discovered where your sister and Wickham were staying．The reason he gave for wanting to help was his belief that he was to blame for not making Wickham's worthlessness more public，and that therefore it was his duty to assist us in every possible way．If he had an- other motive，I am sure it would be just as honourable．He knew that Wickham had a close friend in London，a woman who had once been companion to Miss Darcy，and had been dismissed for some reason．So Mr Darcy found this woman， and bribed her to give him Wickham's present address．He went to see Wickham，and insisted on seeing Lydia，hoping to persuade her to return to her family．However，Lydia told him she only cared for Wickham，and had no intention of leaving him，whether he married her or not Wickham privately told Mr Darcy that he had left the regiment because of his gam- bling debts，not because he intended to marry Lydia，and that he was still hoping to find and marry a woman of fortune in order to have a comfortable income．It was clearly necessary to persuade him to marry Lydia as soon as possible，and Mr Darcy had several meetings with Wickham to arrange finan- cisl matters with him Finally，Mr Darcy was able to visit your uncle，as I have said，to explain the whole business，and to in- sist that he alone should be responsible for paying Wickham the promised amount．Your uncle argued with him for a long time，but our visitor was so obstinate that Mr Gardiner even- tually had to agree．I think，Lizzy，that obstinacy is Mr Darcy's real fault，rather than any of the other faults of which he has been accused．He paid Wickham several thousand pounds，for past debts and future expenses，and attended the wedding to make a final payment．And in spite of Mr Darcy's declared motives，my dear Lizzy，you may be sure that your uncle would never have given in，if we had not assumed that Mr Darcy had another interest in the matter．Will you be very angry with me，my dear Lizzy，if I take this opportunity of saying how much I like him？His behaviour to us has always been as agreeable as when we were in Derbyshire．I think that if he marries the right woman，his wife may teach him to become more sociable．Please forgive me if I have assumed too much，or at least do not punish me by not inviting me to Pemberley．I shall never be happy until I have been all the way round the park．
　　But I must go to my children now．
　　Yours very sincerely，
　　M．Gardiner
　　Elizabeth read this letter with a mixture of pleasure and pain． Mr Darcy had thought so little of his pride that he had spent considerable time，effort and money on two people for whom he must feel the greatest disdain．He had even had to bargain with Wickham！She could not believe he had done all this for her，a woman who had already rejected him．But the fact remained that she and her family owed him everything．How bitterly she now regretted criticizing and mocking him in the past！She was ashamed of herself，but she was proud of him，proud that in a matter of honour，he had been able to conquer his own pride．She was even rather pleased，if a little regretful，that her aunt and uncle had felt sure that there was mutual affection be- tween Mr Darcy and herself．
　　Mrs Bennet was quite depressed when Lydia and Wickham left Longbourn to travel north to Newcastle．But soon Mrs Philips brought the happy news that Mr Bingley was expected to return to Netherfield in a day or two，and Mrs Bennet be- came very excited．She made preparations to invite him to din- ner，and counted the days that must pass before she could send the invitation．
　　However，on only the third morning after his arrival，she caught sight of him from her bedroom window，riding towards Longbourn House，with another gentleman，also on horseback．
　　‘Girls！Quickly！’she cried．‘Mr Bingley is coming！And who's that with him？It must be Mr Darcy，that tall，proud man．Well，as he is Mr Bingley's friend，we must be polite to him，but I must say，I hate the sight of him．’
　　Both Jane and Elizabeth felt uncomfortable，and sympathized with each other．Jane was nervous about meeting Bingley again，and determined not to show her feelings．Elizabeth was uneasy at the thought of seeing Darcy，as she was the only one who knew how much the whole family owed him，in spite of their general dislike of him．She was astonished that he had come to see her，and for a moment she allowed herself to hope that his affection and wishes might still be the same．
　　She was disappointed，however，by the visit．Mr Darcy said scarcely anything to her，and appeared more thoughtful and less anxious to please than in Derbyshire．She wondered bitter- ly why he had come．In addition，she was highly embarrassed by her mother's behaviour．With flattering smiles Mrs Bennet concentrated all her conversation on Mr Bingley，while throw- ing the occasional unpleasant remark in Mr Darcy's direction． The only positive effect of the gentlemen's visit was the way in which Jane's charm and beauty appeared to excite Mr Bing- ley's admiration all over again，which Elizabeth was relieved and delighted to see．
　　The Bennet family did not see the two gentlemen again until Tuesday，when they came to dinner at Longbourn．It was a great pleasure to Elizabeth to watch Bingley sitting beside Jane，and talking happily to her，but this was the only enjoy- ment she gained from the party．Mr Darcy was unfortunately sitting a long way from her，next to Mrs Bennet．Elizabeth could see how seldom they spoke to each other，and how cold and formal their behaviour to each other was．She would have given anything to be able to tell him that his kindness was ap- preciated by at least one of the family．All through the long dinner，she desperately hoped there would be an opportunity for her to have some real conversation with him later．But the evening passed without any more than a short exchange of po- liteness between them，and Elizabeth lost all hope of immediate happiness．
　　Two days after this，Mr Bingley called at Longbourn House again．This time he was alone，as Mr Darcy had gone to Lon- don．He sat with the ladies for over an hour，talking cheerfully and agreeably to them．He came the next morning，and again in the evening．Mrs Bennet took every opportunity to leave him alone with Jane，by calling her other daughters out of the room for some reason or other．She was hoping to encourage him to propose，but in spite of her efforts Bingley remained charming， and agreeable，and unattached．
　　But on the third day Bingley came in the morning to go shooting with Mr Bennet．He stayed for lunch，and was still there in the evening．And when Elizabeth entered the sitting- room unexpectedly，to her surprise she saw Jane and Bingley standing close together near the fire．They turned hurriedly when they heard her，and moved awkwardly away from each other．Bingley whispered something to Jane，and ran out of the room．Jane could not keep her secret from her sister，and， kiss- ing her，cried，‘I am the happiest creature in the world！Oh， Lizzy！I do not deserve this！Why isn't everybody as happy as I am！’
　　Elizabeth congratulated her sister most warmly and sincerely．‘At last！’she thought．‘The end of all Mr Darcy's anxious advice！The end of all Caroline Bingley's lies and plans！The happiest，wisest，most reasonable end！’
　　‘I must go and tell my mother，’continued Jane，‘as he has just gone to ask my father's permission．Oh，Lizzy！What happiness！’
　　It was a joyful evening for all of them．Jane looked more beautiful than ever，and Bingley was clearly very much in love． Mrs Bennet could not say enough to describe her delight，al- though she talked of nothing else all evening，and Mr Bennet was evidently very pleased．
　　Before the two eldest sisters went to bed that night，Eliza- beth listened willingly to Jane's long description of Bingley's good qualities．At the end，Jane added，‘Oh，Lizzy！If only I could see you as happy as I am！If only there were another man like Bingley for you！’
　　‘Dear Jane，I can never be as happy as you，because I'm not as good as you．No，no，let me find my own husband．Perhaps， if I'm very lucky，I may meet another Mr Collins one day．’
　　The engagement was not kept a secret for very long．Mrs Bennet whispered the news to Mrs Philips，who told all her neighbours in Meryton．Everybody soon agreed that the Ben- nets were the luckiest family in the world， although only a few weeks before，when Lydia had run away，they had been consid- ered the most unfortunate．






■ 12 Elizabeth and Darcy
　　One morning，about a week after Bingley had proposed to Jane，a carriage arrived outside Longbourn House． Elizabeth，Kitty and their mother were in the sitting-room， when suddenly the door was thrown open，and their visitor entered．It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh．
　　They were all extremely astonished．Mrs Bennet，flattered to have such an important visitor，received her with great polite- ness．After sitting for a moment in silence，Lady Catherine said very stiffly to Elizabeth，‘I hope you are well，Miss Bennet． That lady，I suppose，is your mother．And that，I suppose，is one of your sisters．’
　　Elizabeth replied that she was correct in thinking so．Lady Catherine rose and said，‘I would like to have a walk in your garden，Miss Bennet，if you would accompany me．’
　　‘Go，my dear，’cried Mrs Bennet．‘Show her ladyship the different walks．I'm sure she will like them．’
　　As they passed through the hall，Lady Catherine opened the doors into the different rooms，looked in，and declared them to be reasonable-looking rooms．They went into the garden in si- lence．Elizabeth was determined to make no effort at conversa- tion with a woman who was being more than usually rude and disagreeable．
　　Lady Catherine began speaking when she was sure they were alone．‘You must know，Miss Bennet，why I have come．’
　　Elizabeth looked surprised．Indeed，you are mistaken， madam．I have no idea why you are honouring us with a visit．’
　　‘Miss Bennet，’replied her ladyship angrily，‘however in- sincere you may be，you shall not find me so．A most alarming report reached me two days ago．I was told that you，Miss Elizabeth Bennet，would soon be engaged to my nephew，my own nephew，Mr Darcy．Although I knew it must be a shame- ful lie，and I would not offend him by supposing it to be possi- ble，I decided at once to come here， to let you know my feelings．’
　　‘If you believed it to be impossible，’said Elizabeth，with disdain，‘I wonder why your ladyship took the trouble of com- ing so far．’
　　‘I came to insist on having this report contradicted．Tell me，is it true？’
　　‘Your ladyship may ask questions which I shall not choose to answer．’
　　‘This is too much！Miss Bennet，I insist on an answer．Has my nephew made you an offer of marriage？’
　　‘Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible．’
　　‘It ought to be impossible，but your skilful charms may have made him forget，in a moment of foolishness，what he owes to himself and his family．You must tell me．I am almost his nearest relation，and I have a right to know his plans．’
　　‘But you have no right to know mine．’
　　‘Let me speak plainly．This marriage，which you dare to hope for，can never take place，because Mr Darcy is engaged to my daughter．His mother and I planned their marriage，when they were still children．They are an ideal couple，both from respectable，honourable，ancient families，with an excellent for- tune on both sides．What can possibly divide them？The des- perate ambitions of a young woman without family，connec- tions or fortune？It cannot be！And I warn you，Miss Bennet，if you marry him，do not expect to be noticed by his family or friends．Your name will never even be mentioned by any of us．
　　‘These are heavy misfortunes，but the wife of Mr Darcy must necessarily be so happy that she could not regret her mar- riage.
　　‘Obstinate girl！Tell me，are you engaged to him？’
　　Elizabeth could not avoid saying，after a moment's thought， ‘I am not．’
　　Lady Catherine seemed pleased．‘And will you promise me never to enter into such an engagement？’
　　‘I will make no such promise．You have totally misunder- stood my character if you think I can be persuaded by such threats．I do not know whether your nephew would approve of your interference in his life，but you certainly have no right to interfere in mine．’
　　‘To all the objections I have mentioned，I add one more．I am aware of your younger sister's elopement．Is such a girl to be my nephew's sister-in-law，and bring shame on the ancient name of Darcy？’
　　‘You can now have nothing more to say，’Elizabeth said coldly.‘You have insulted me in every possible way.’She rose，and started walking back to the house．Lady Catherine also rose，and walked with her.
　　‘Unfeeling，selfish girl！So you are determined to have him？’
　　‘I have not said that. I am only determined to do what in my opinion will bring me happiness，without reference to you.’
　　‘Do not imagine，Miss Bennet，that you will ever achieve your ambition.’When they arrived at her carriage，she added， ‘I send no compliments to your mother．You do not deserve such politeness. I am most seriously displeased.’
　　Elizabeth did not answer，and entered the house，while Lady Catherine drove away in her carriage．She had to tell a little lie to her mother to explain Lady Catherine's unexpected visit and speedy departure，and then she shut herself in her room to consider what it all meant．Perhaps the Collinses had imagined，after the news of Jane's engagement to Bingley，that Darcy might marry her.They must have told Lady Catherine， who had made a special journey to Longbourn in order to break off this supposed engagement．Elizabeth began to feel depressed. If，as seemed likely，Lady Catherine now went straight to London to talk to her nephew，she might easily convince him of the inferiority of Elizabeth's social position． He would probably feel that his aunt's objections，which to Elizabeth appeared laughably weak，contained much common sense．In that case he might make up his mind not to marry her under any circumstances，and to keep away from Longbourn al- together．
　　The next morning Mr Bennet called Elizabeth into the li- brary．In his hand he had a letter，which he had just received．
　　‘Lizzy，I did not know I had two daughters about to be married．I congratulate you on a very important conquest．’
　　Elizabeth blushed，thinking that Darcy himself had written．
　　‘You seem to know what I mean，but I think even you will not be able to guess your admirer's name．This letter is from Mr Collins，and he first congratulates me on Jane's engage- ment，of which the gossiping Lucases have told him．Apparent- ly the Lucases also think that my daughter Elizabeth might soon be marrying one of the great gentlemen in the country— Mr Darcy，in fact！Now，Lizzy，I think I have surprised you． Could he have chosen anyone we know as a more unlikely hus- band for you？Mr Darcy，who never praises，only criticizes women，and who probably never looked at you in his life！ What an admirable choice！’
　　Elizabeth tried to share her father's amusement，but had never appreciated his humour so little．
　　‘He goes on to say that when he dutifully gave this news to her ladyship，she made many objections，and stated that she would never agree to the marriage．He kindly gives us this in- formation，he says，to prevent his cousin Elizabeth and her ad- mirer from rushing into a marriage not approved by their fami- lies．Well，Lizzy！What do you think of that？I do enjoy Mr Collins’letters．And I am delighted the Lucases thought of Mr Darcy．His perfect indifference to you，and your strong dislike of him，make it so extremely amusing．Don't you agree？’
　　Elizabeth had great difficulty in pretending to be amused by the letter．It was necessary to laugh，when she would rather have cried．Her father had most cruelly hurt her by speaking of Darcy’ s indifference，and she began to wonder whether per- haps，instead of his seeing too little，she might have imagined too much．
　　In spite of Elizabeth's doubts，however，Mr Darcy returned to Netherfield a few days later，and he and Mr Bingley came to Longbourn soon afterwards．Bingley suggested they should all go for a walk，and while he and Jane concentrated on their own private conversation，some distance away，Elizabeth found her- self alone with Mr Darcy．
　　Taking a deep breath，she said bravely，‘Mr Darcy，I can no longer stop myself from thanking you for your extraordinary kindness to my poor sister．If the rest of my family knew of it， they would add their grateful thanks to mine．’
　　‘I had hoped to keep it a secret，’he answered，‘but if you must thank me，let it be for yourself alone．I shall not attempt to deny that wishing to give happiness to you was one of my reasons for helping your sister．But your family owe me noth- ing．Much as I respect them，I believe I thought only of you．’
　　Elizabeth was too embarrassed to say a word．After a short pause he added，‘You are too generous to play with my feelings. If you still feel as you did last April，tell me so at once. My affections and wishes are unchanged，but one word from you will prevent me from ever mentioning them again．’
　　Elizabeth forced herself to speak，and immediately，though hesitatingly，gave him to understand that her feelings had changed so considerably since that time that she was now grateful and pleased to accept his proposal．When Darcy heard this，he was probably happier than he had ever been before，and he expressed himself as warmly and sensibly as a man violently in love can．
　　They walked on，without noticing in which direction．There was so much to be thought，and felt，and said．She soon learnt that his aunt had indeed seen him in London，after her disap- pointing visit to Longbourn．But unluckily for her ladyship，her critical comments and description of her conversation with Elizabeth produced exactly the opposite result to what she had intended．
　　‘It taught me to hope，’Darcy explained，‘as I had hardly ever allowed myself to hope before．I knew that if you had de- cided never to marry me，you would have admitted it to Lady Catherine openly and honestly．’
　　Elizabeth blushed and laughed as she replied，‘Yes，you have experienced my honesty.After scolding you so rudely to your face，I was obviously quite capable of criticizing you to all your relations. ’
　　‘I certainly deserved all your accusations. As an only son，I was brought up to be selfish and proud，and to consider myself superior to others．I would have continued like that if you， dearest，loveliest Elizabeth，had not taught me a lesson．I owe you a great deal for that．’
　　‘And I，how soon I thought better of you，when I read the letter you sent me！When I realized your description of events must be true，all my prejudices against you were removed！’
　　They talked of their unexpected meeting at Pemberley， which had renewed their interest in each other，of Georgiana Darcy's immediate liking for Elizabeth，and of the engagement between Jane and Bingley．
　　‘I guessed，’smiled Elizabeth，‘that you had given your permission for their marriage. ’
　　‘My permission！No！But I must admit I confessed to Bingley that I had made a mistake in supposing that your sister was indifferent to him，and I encouraged him to return to Netherfield to see if she still cared for him．I am delighted to hear of their engagement．He will be one of the happiest men in the world when he marries your sister．Only I shall be happier than him，when I am fortunate enough to marry you.
　　Their conversation continued in this way，until they sudden- ly became aware of the lateness of the hour. They returned to Longbourn House，where they separated.
　　That evening Elizabeth could not help telling Jane her news． However，she almost regretted doing so，when she saw the astonishment on Jane's face．At first Jane could not believe that her sister was engaged to a man she had so disliked，and she wondered if Elizabeth could really be happy with him．But when she had been convinced by Elizabeth's explanations and promises，she was delighted，and congratulated her sister with all her heart．
　　The next day Mr Darcy came to ask Mr Bennet officially for Elizabeth's hand in marriage．Mr Bennet also had to be per- suaded that his favourite daughter could really be happy with such a proud，disdainful man．Only Mrs Bennet did not need to be convinced，although she was，most unusually，speechless with shock when she heard the news．When she recovered a little，she cried，‘My sweetest Lizzy！How rich you will be！ What jewels，what carriages you will have！Mr Darcy！Such a charming man！So handsome！So tall！I am so sorry I dis- liked him before．Ten thousand a year！Oh，my dear Lizzy！’
　　During the weeks of her engagement，Elizabeth was glad to see that all her family were beginning to appreciate Mr Darcy's good qualities．Determined to protect him from her mother's over-familiarity，she was relieved to see that Mrs Bennet res- pected her future son-in-law too much to say more than a few words to him．In spite of this，Elizabeth looked happily forward to the time when she and Darcy would leave Longbourn and move to all the comfort and elegance of their own home at Pemberley.
　　Mrs Bennet was a happy mother indeed on the day when she got rid of her two most deserving daughters．It may be guessed with what delighted pride she afterwards visited Mrs Bingley and talked of Mrs Darcy．Mr Bennet missed his second daugh- ter very much，and greatly enjoyed going to Pemberley to visit her.
　　Mr Bingley and Jane stayed only a year at Netherfield，be- fore buying a large house in the north，only fifty kilometres from Pemberley. In this way，the two sisters were permitted their dearest wish，and were able to visit each other frequently．
　　Mary was the only sister who remained at home，as Kitty spent most of her time with her two elder sisters，which greatly improved her behaviour，character and intelligence．
　　Lydia and Wickham were always moving from one place to another in search of cheap rooms，and always spending more than they should．His affection for her soon became indiffer- ence，while hers for him lasted a little longer. They were not too proud to ask Lydia's sisters for financial help during every crisis，and Elizabeth and Jane both sent them regular gifts of money to pay their bills．
　　Caroline Bingley was deeply offended by Darcy's marriage， but she did not show her bitterness，and was always extremely polite to Elizabeth. Georgiana Darcy，on the other hand，became greatly attached to Elizabeth，and had the highest opinion of her．Lady Catherine，however，was so rude about Elizabeth to her nephew that he broke off communication completely with her for a time．In the end Elizabeth persuaded him to forgive his aunt，who eventually fongot her pride enough to visit them at Pemberley．
　　There remained a close relationship between the Darcys and the Gardiners．Darcy and Elizabeth were both warmly grateful to the two people who，by inviting her to Derbyshire and tak- ing her to visit Pemberley，had brought them together．




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

　　Tess of the D’urbervilles by Thomas Hardy





■ The Maiden



■ 1
　　One evening at the end of May a middle-aged man was walking home from Shaston to the village of Marlott in the Vale of Blackmoor．His legs were thin and weak，and he could not walk in a straight line．He had an empty egg-basket on his arm， and his hat was old and worn．After a while he passed an elderly parson riding a grey horse．
　　‘Good night，’said the man with the basket．
　　‘Good night，Sir John，’said the parson．
　　After another step or two the man stopped and turned round to speak to the parson．
　　‘Now，sir，last market-day we met on this road at the same time，and I said “Good night”and you answered“Good night，Sir John，”as you did just now．’
　　‘I did，’said the parson．
　　‘And once before that，almost a month ago．’
　　‘I may have．’
　　‘So why do you call me Sir John，when I am only John Durbeyfield？’
　　The parson rode nearer，and after a moment's hesitation，explained：‘It was because I've discovered something of historical interest．I am Parson Tringham，the historian．Do you really not know，Durbeyfield，that you are a direct descendant of the ancient and noble family of the d’Urbervilles？They descended from Sir Pagan d’Urberville，who came from Normandy with William the Conqueror in 1066．’
　　‘Never heard that before，sir！’
　　‘Well，it's true．Let me see your face．Yes， you have the d’Urberville nose and chin．D’Urbervilles have owned land and served their King for hundreds of years．There have been many Sir Johns，and you could have been Sir John yourself．’
　　‘Well！’exclaimed the man．‘And how long has this news about me been known，Parson Tringham？’
　　‘Nobody knows about it at all，’said the parson．‘I just happened to discover it last spring，when I was trying to find out more about the d’Urbervilles and noticed your name in the village．’
　　‘I've got an old silver spoon，and an old seal too at home，’said the man，wondering．‘So where do we d”Urbervilles live now，Parson？’
　　‘You don't live anywhere．You have died，as a noble family．’
　　‘That's bad．So where do we lie？’
　　‘In the churchyard at Kingsbere-sub-Greenhill．’
　　‘And where are our family lands？’
　　‘You haven't any．’
　　John Durbeyfield paused．‘And what should I do about it，sir？’
　　‘Oh，nothing．It's a fact of historical interest，nothing more．Good night．’
　　‘But you'll come and have some beer with me，Parson Tringham？’
　　‘No，thank you，not this evening，Durbeyfield．You've had enough already．’The parson rode away，half regretting that he had told Durbeyfield of his discovery．
　　Durbeyfield walked on a few steps in a dream，then sat down with his basket．In a few minutes a boy appeared．Durbeyfield called to him．
　　‘Boy！Take this basket！I want you to go and do something for me．’
　　The boy frowned．‘Who are you，John Durbeyfield，to order me about and call me“boy”？You know my name as well as I know yours！’
　　‘Do you，do you？That's the secret！Well，Fred，I don't mind telling you that the secret is that I'm one of a noble family．’And Durbeyfield lay back comfortably on the grass．‘Sir John d’Urberville，that's who I am．And I've got the family seal to prove it！’
　　‘Oh？’
　　‘Now take up the basket，and tell them in the village to send a horse and carriage to me immediately．Here's a shilling for you．’
　　This made a difference to the boy's view of the situation．
　　‘Yes，Sir John．Thank you，Sir John．’
　　As they spoke，sounds of music came through the evening air from the village．
　　‘What's that？’said Durbeyfield．‘Have they heard my news already？’
　　‘It's the women dancing，Sir John．’
　　The boy went on his way and Durbeyfield lay waiting in the evening sun．Nobody passed by for a long time，and he could just hear the faint music in the distance．
　　The village of Marlott lies in the beautiful Vale of Blackmoor．Although this valley is only four hours away from London，it has not yet been discovered by tourists and artists．The best view of the vale is from the hills surrounding it；it looks like a map spread out．It is a quiet，sheltered part of the countryside，where the fields are always green and the rivers never dry up．To the south lies the great dividing line of hills．From here to the coast the hills are open，the sun pours down on the huge dry fields，the atmosphere is colourless．But here in the valley lies a completely different countryside，smaller and more delicate．The fields are tiny，the air makes you sleepy，the sky is of the deepest blue．Everywhere you can see a rich greenery of grass and trees，covering smaller hills and valleys．This is the Vale of Blackmoor．
　　And in the village of Marlott，following ancient custom，the young women gathered to dance every holiday． For this May- Day dance，all wore white dresses．There was a fine，handsome girl among them，with a red ribbon in her hair．As they danced，they noticed a carriage go by． Durbeyfield lay back in it，singing，‘I'm—Sir—John—and—I've—got—a—spoon—and—seal—and—my—family—lies—at—Kingsbere！’The girl with the ribbon，who was called Tess，turned red and said quickly to her friends，‘Father's tired，that's all．’The other girls just laughed but stopped when Tess looked unhappy．The dancing went on．
　　In the evening the men of the village came to watch and later to join the dancers．Three young strangers，who were passing by，also stopped to look．They explained they were brothers on a walking tour．The older two continued their walk，but the youngest seemed more interested in the girls than his brothers were，and stayed to dance with several of them． As he left the dance， he noticed Tess， who seemed a little sad that he had not chosen her． He looked back from the road， and could still see her in her white dress， standing modestly apart from the dancers． He wished he had danced with her． He wished he had asked her name． But it was too late．He hurried on to join his brothers．
　　The young stranger had made an impression on Tess． But soon， worried by her father's strange appearance that afternoon，she decided to walk home． After the excitement of the dance， her parents'small cottage was a depressing sight．It was dark inside， as they had only one candle．The furniture was old and worn． There were six children crowded into the tiny space．Their mother was doing the washing at the same time as putting the baby to sleep．Looking after so many children had aged Joan Durbeyfield， but she still showed some of her early prettiness，which Tess had inherited．
　　‘Let me help with the washing， mother，’said Tess gently．
　　‘Oh Tess，I'm glad you've come，’said her mother．‘There's something I must tell you．’
　　‘Is it anything to do with father making such a fool of himself this afternoon？’asked Tess，frowning．
　　‘That's all part of the excitement！They've discovered we're the oldest family in the whole county，going back a long way！And our real name is d’Urberville！Doesn't that make you proud！That's why your father rode home in the carriage，not because he'd been drinking， as people thought．’
　　‘I'm glad of that．Will it do us any good， mother？’
　　‘Oh yes！Great things may come of it．No doubt our noble relations will be arriving in their carriages as soon as they find out．’
　　‘Where is father now？’asked Tess suddenly．
　　Her mother did not answer directly．‘He saw the doctor today， you know．It's fat round the heart，he says．That's the cause of his illness． He might last ten years… might last ten months or days．’
　　Tess looked anxious．Her father， suddenly a great man， to die so soon！‘But where is father？’she asked firmly．
　　‘Now don't you get angry！’said Mrs Durbeyfield．‘The poor man was feeling so weak after the news that he went to Rolliver's．He needs to build up his strength to deliver the beehives tomorrow，remember．’
　　‘Oh my God！’cried Tess．‘He went to a public house！And you agreed to it， mother！’
　　‘No，I didn't，’said Mrs Durbeyfield crossly．‘I've been waiting for you to look after the children while I fetch him．’
　　Tess knew that her mother greatly looked forwad to these trips to Rolliver's．There she could sit by her husband's side among the beer-drinkers，and forget that the children existed．It was one of the few bright moments in her hardworking life．Mrs Durbeyfield went out，and Tess was left with the children．They were very young，and totally dependent on the Durbeyfield couple：six helpless creatures who had not asked to be born at all，much less to be part of the irresponsible Durbeyfield family．






■ 1 



■ 2
　　It was eleven o’clock before all the family were in bed，and two o’clock next morning was the latest time to set off with the beehives．It was a distance of twenty or thirty miles on bad roads to Casterbridge，where the Saturday market was held．At half-past one Mrs Durbeyfield came into the bedroom where Tess and all the children slept．
　　‘The poor man can't go，’she whispered．Tess sat up in bed．
　　‘But it's late for the bees already．We must take them today．’
　　‘Maybe a young man would go？’asked Mrs Durbeyfield doubtfully．‘One of the ones dancing with you yesterday？’
　　‘Oh no，not for the world！’said Tess proudly．‘And let everybody know the reason？I'd be so ashamed！I think I could go if little Abraham came with me．’
　　Tess and Abraham dressed， led out the old horse Prince with the loaded waggon，and set off in the dark．They cheered themselves up with bread and butter and conversation．
　　‘Tess！’said Abraham， after a silence．
　　‘Yes， Abraham．’
　　‘Aren't you glad that we're a noble family？’
　　‘Not particularly．’
　　‘But you're glad you're going to marry a gentleman？’
　　‘What？’said Tess，lifting her face．
　　‘Our noble relations are going to help you marry a gentleman．’
　　‘Me？Our noble relations？We haven't any．Whatever put that into your head？’
　　‘I heard them talking about it at home．There's a rich lady of our family out at Trantridge，and mother said that if you claimed relationship with her，she'd help you marry a gentleman．’
　　His sister became suddenly silent．Abraham talked on， not noticing her lack of attention．
　　‘Did you say the stars were worlds，Tess？’
　　‘Yes．’
　　‘All like ours？’
　　‘They seem like our apples—most of them good， a few bad．’
　　‘Which do we live on？A good one or a bad one？’
　　‘A bad one．’
　　‘If we lived on a good one，how would things be different？’
　　‘Well，father wouldn't be ill and cough as he does，and mother wouldn't always be washing．’
　　‘And you would have been a ready-made rich lady，and not have to marry a gentleman．’
　　‘Oh，Aby，don't—don't talk of that any more！’
　　Abraham finally went to sleep on the waggon．Tess drove the horse． Gradually she fell into a dream． She could see her father，foolish in his pride， and the rich gentleman of her mother's imagination laughing at the poor Durbeyfield family．
　　Suddenly she awoke from her dream to noise and violent movement．Something terrible had happened．She jumped down and discovered that the post carriage，speeding along the dark road， had driven into her slow and unlighted waggon．Poor Prince was seriously hurt，and as she watched he fell to the ground．
　　‘You were on the wrong side，’said the post driver．‘I must go on with the post， but I'll send somebody to help you as soon as I can．You'd better stay here with your waggon．’
　　He went on his way， while Tess stood and waited，tears pouring down her cheeks． Daylight came． Prince lay there，unmoving，his eyes half open．
　　‘It's all my fault，’cried Tess．‘What will mother and father live on now？Aby，Aby，wake up！We can't go on with our beehives—Prince is dead！’When Aby realized what had happened， his face looked like an old man's．
　　‘It's because we live on a bad star，isn't it，Tess？’he said through his tears．
　　Finally a man arrived with a horse，to take the waggon on to Casterbridge to deliver the beehives，and then collect Prince on the way back．When they got home，Tess broke the news to her parents．They were not angry with her，but she blamed herself completely．
　　When Durbeyfield heard he would only get a few shillings for Prince's dead body，he rose to the occasion．
　　‘We d’Urbervilles don't sell our horses for cat's meat！’he insisted．And the following day he worked harder than usual in digging a grave，where Prince was buried．All the children cried：
　　‘Has he gone to heaven？’asked Abraham in tears．But Tess did not cry．Her face was dry and pale．She felt she had murdered a friend．



■ 2



■ 3
　　Life now became rather difficult for the Durbeyfields．Without Prince to carry loads，John Durbeyfield could not buy and sell as he used to．He had never worked hard or regularly，and now he only occasionally felt like working．Tess wondered how she could help her parents．One day her mother made a suggestion．
　　‘It's lucky we've found out about your noble blood，Tess．Do you know there's a very rich lady called Mrs d’Urberville living on the other side of the wood？ She must be our relation．You must go to her and claim relationship with her，and ask for same help in our trouble．’
　　‘I wouldn't like to do that，’said Tess．‘If there is such a lady，it would be enough to be friendly．We can't expect help from her．’
　　‘You could persuade anybody，my dear．Besides，something else might happen．You never know．’And her mother nodded wisely．
　　‘I'd rather try to get work，’said Tess sadly．
　　‘What do you say，Durbeyfield？’said his wife，turning to him．
　　‘I don't like my children asking for help，’said he proudly．‘I'm the head of the oldest branch of the family and a noble family like ours shouldn't have to ask for help．’Tess could not accept his reasons for not going．
　　‘Well，as I killed the horse，mother，I suppose I ought to go．But don't start thinking about her finding a husband for me．
　　‘Who said I had such an idea？’asked Joan innocently．
　　‘I know you，mother．But I'll go．’
　　Next morning Tess walked to Shaston，a town she hardly knew，and went on by waggon to Trantridge．The Vale of Blackmoor was her only world， and she had never been far outside the valley．All the knowledge she had came from her lessons in the village school，which she had left a year or two earlier．As soon as she left school she had tried to earn a little money by helping in the fields or milking cows or making butter．She blamed her mother for thoughtlessly producing so many children．Joan Durbeyfield was like a child herself， and never thought about the future．It was Tess who worried and worked and felt responsible for her little brothers and sisters．So naturally it was Tess who should represent her family at the d’Urberville home．
　　From Trantridge she walked up a hill，and turning a corner，saw the house．She stoppd in amazement．It was large and almost new， a rich red against the green of the bushes around it．Behind it lay the woods called The Chase， an ancient forest．There were greenhouses and well-kept gardens．There was no lack of money here． Tess hesitated， almost frightened．
　　‘I thought we were an old family！’she said to herself，‘but this is all new！’She wished she had not come．
　　She was right in a way．All this was owned by the d’Urbervilles，or the Stoke-d’Urbervilles as they called themselves at first．The Stokes were a northern business family who took an old-sounding name to add to their own when they moved into the south．So Tess was more of a d’Urberville than any of them， but did not know it．
　　A young man appeared in the garden． He looked about twenty-four， and was tall and dark， with full red lips and a black moustache curled at the ends．
　　‘Well，my beauty，what can I do for you？’he said， looking interestedly at her．‘I'm Mr d’Urberville．’
　　It needed all Tess's courage to reply．‘I came to see your mother，sir．’
　　‘I'm afraid you can't see her． She's ill．What do you want to see her about？’
　　‘I…I…it seems so foolish！’
　　‘Never mind，’said he kindly．‘I like foolish things．Try again，my dear．’
　　‘I came，sir，to tell you we are of the same family as you．’
　　‘Aha！Poor relations？’
　　‘Yes．’
　　‘Stokes？’
　　‘No，d’Urbervilles．’
　　‘Oh yes，of course，I mean d’Urbervilles．’
　　‘We have several proofs that we are d’Urbervilles．We have an old silver spoon and a seal at home．But mother uses the spoon to stir the soup．Mother said we ought to tell you，as we are the oldest branch of the family and we've lost our horse in an accident．’
　　‘Very kind of your mother，’said Alec d’Urberville，‘and I certainly don't regret it．’He looked admiringly at Tess，whose face blushed a deep pink．‘And so you've come on a friendly visit？’
　　‘I suppose I have，’murmured Tess， looking uncomfortable．
　　‘Let us walk round the gardens until you have to go home，my pretty cousin．’Tess wanted to leave as soon as possible，but the young man insisted．He took her to the greenhouses．
　　‘Do you like strawberries？’he asked．
　　‘Yes，’said Tess，‘when they are ready．’
　　‘These are ready now，’and so saying，d’Urberville picked one and held it to her mouth．
　　‘No no！’she said．‘I'd rather take it myself．’
　　But Alec put it into her mouth．He put roses into her hair and filled her basket with strawberries and flowers． He gave her food to eat，and watched her，while he quietly smoked a cigarette． She looked more adult and womanly than she really was．Alec could not take his eyes off her．She did not know as she smiled innocently at the flowers that behind the cigarette smoke was the cause of future sorrow in her life．
　　‘What is your name？’asked Alec．
　　‘Tess Durbeyfield．We live at Marlott．’
　　‘I must see if my mother can find a place for you．’They said goodbye and she set off home carrying her strawberries and flowers．
　　This then was the beginning． Why did she have to meet the wrong man， and one who was so strongly attracted to her？Yet to the right man， she was only a half-forgotten impression from an evening's dancing in a country field．In life， the right man to love hardly ever comes at the right time for loving．Nature does not often answer a call for love， until the caller is tired of calling．In this case，as in millions，it was not the two halves of a perfect whole who met．A missing half wandered somewhere else，arriving much later．This delay was to have tragic results．



■ 3



■ 4
　　When Tess arrived home the following afternoon a letter had already been received by her mother．It appeared to come from Mrs d’Urberville，and offered Tess work looking after chickens． Joan Durbeyfield was delighted．
　　‘It's just a way of getting you there without raising your hopes．She's going to recognize you as family，I'm sure of it．’
　　‘I would rather stay here with father and you，’said Tess，looking out of the window．
　　‘But why？’
　　‘I'd rather not tell you， mother．I don't really know．’
　　A few days later when Tess came back from looking for work， the children came running out and danced round her．
　　‘The gentleman's been here！’they shouted．
　　Joan was full of smiles． Mrs d’Urberville's son had called，and asked if Tess could come or not．
　　‘He's a very handsome man！’said Mrs Durbeyfield．
　　‘I don't think so，’said Tess coldly．‘I'll think it over．’She left the room．
　　‘He's in love with her， you can see that，’said Mrs Durbeyfield to her husband．‘No doubt he'll marry her and she'll be a fine lady．’
　　John Durbeyfield had more pride in his new-found blood than energy or health．‘That's what young Mr d’Urberville is trying to do！Improve his blood by marrying into the old line！’
　　Persuaded by her mother and the children，Tess finally agreed to go．Mrs Durbeyfield secretly made wedding plans．Then the day came when Tess， wearing her best Sunday clothes on her mother's orders，said goodbye to her family．
　　‘Goodbye，my girl，’said Sir John，waking from a short sleep．‘Tell young d’Urberville I'll sell him the title，yes，sell it，at a reasonable price．’
　　‘Not for less than a thousand pounds！’cried Lady Durbeyfield．
　　‘No，tell him he can have it for a hundred！No，fifty， no—twenty！Yes，twenty pounds，that's the lowest．Family honour is family honour and I won't take any less！’
　　Tess felt like crying but turned quickly and went out．Her mother went with her to the edge of the village．There she stopped and stood waving goodbye，and watched her daughter walking away into the distance． A waggon came to take her bags，and then a fashionable little carriage appeared．It was driven by a well-dressed young man smoking a cigar．After a moment's hesitation，Tess stepped in．
　　Joan Durbeyfield，watching，wondered for the first time if she had been right in encouraging Tess to go． That night she said to her husband，‘Perhaps I should have found out how the gentleman really feels about her．’
　　‘Yes，perhaps you ought，’murmured John，half asleep．Joan's natural trust in the future came back to her．
　　‘Well，if he doesn't marry her before，he'll marry her after．If she plays her cards right．’
　　‘If he knows about her d’Urberville blood，you mean？’
　　‘No，stupid，if she shows him her pretty face．’
　　Meanwhile Alec d’Urberville was whipping his horse and driving the carriage faster and faster downhill．The trees rushed past at great speed．Tess was feeling thoroughly frightened．He took no notice when she asked him to slow down．She cried out and held on to his arm in fear．
　　‘Don't touch my arm， hold on to my waist！’he shouted． At the top of another hill he said，laughing，‘Put your arms around me again， my beauty！’
　　‘Never！’said Tess independently．
　　‘Let me give you one little kiss， Tess， and I'll stop！’
　　‘Will nothing else do？’cried Tess in despair．‘Oh， very well！’
　　As they raced on，he was on the point of kissing her，when she suddenly moved aside，so that he almost fell off．
　　‘I'll break both our necks！’he swore passionately．
　　‘I thought you would be kind to me，’said Tess，her eyes filling with tears．‘I don't want to kiss anybody！’
　　But he insisted，so in the end she sat still and d’Urberville kissed her．No sooner had he done so than she wiped the place on her cheek with her handkerchief．Just then her hat blew off into the road and d’Urberville stopped the horse．Tess jumped down to get it，then turned triumphantly to Alec．
　　‘I shall walk from here，’she said firmly．
　　‘But it's five or six miles more．’
　　‘I don't care．’
　　‘You made that hat blow off on purpose！You did，didn't you？’
　　She was silent．He swore angrily at her．
　　‘Don't use such bad words！’cried Tess．‘I shall go back to mother！I hate you！’
　　D’Urberville suddenly started laughing．
　　‘Look，I promise never to do that again，’he said．‘Come，let me take you in the carriage．’
　　But she refused， and began to walk in the direction of Trantridge．So they progressed slowly，d’Urberville driving the carriage beside Tess．



■ 4



■ 5
　　The chickens for which Tess was responsible lived in an old cottage on Mrs d’Urberville's land．On her first day Tess had to take some of the chickens to show to their owner．She immediately realized the old lady was blind．Mrs d’Urberville held each bird and felt it carefully to see that it was in good health．At the end she suddenly asked Tess a question．
　　‘Can you whistle？’
　　‘Whistle，Ma’am？’
　　‘Yes，whistle tunes．I want you to practise and whistle to my birds every day．’
　　‘Yes，Ma’am．’
　　Tess was not surprised at Mrs d’Urberville's cold manner，and did not expect any more of such a great lady．However，she did not realize that the old lady had never even heard about the family connection．
　　Tess began to enjoy her new work with the chickens，and the next day in the cottage garden she decided to practise whistling as instructed．She was shocked to find that she had completely forgotten how to whistle．Suddenly she noticed a movement behind a tree near the wall．It was Alec d’Urberville．
　　‘Well，cousin Tess，’he said，‘I've never seen such a beautiful thing as you！I've been watching you from over the wall．Look，I can give you a lesson or two．’
　　‘Oh no you won't！’cried Tess，going back towards the door．
　　‘Don't worry，I won't touch you．Just look…’and he showed her how to whistle．From that moment Tess found she could whistle tunes to the birds just as Mrs d’Urberville wanted．And as the weeks passed， she often met d’Urberville in the garden and began to lose her shyness of him．
　　Every Saturday night the other farm workers from the surrounding area used to go to drink and dance in the market town two or three miles away． On Sundays they would sleep late．For a long time Tess did not go with them．But after a while she wanted a change from her routine and began to go on the weekly trips regularly．She always came home with the others at night， preferring the protection of being in a group．One Saturday night she was in the town looking for her companions as it was time to go home，when she met Alec d’Urberville．
　　‘What，my beauty？Here so late？’he said，smiling at her．
　　‘I'm just waiting for my friends，’she answered．
　　‘I'll see you again，’he said as she moved away．
　　She became worried when she realized the workers were still dancing wildly and would not be going home soon．Again she caught sight of Alec，waiting in a doorway，his cigar glowing red in the dark．Eventually she joined a group wandering home．They had all been drinking，but she felt safer with them than alone．But after a while she became involved in a quarrel with them，and was trying to get away from the angry group，when Alec d’Urberville rode by．He offered to take her home on the back of his horse．She hesitatedt，then accepted．
　　Together they rode along in the dark，Tess holding on to Alec．She was very tired：every day that week she had got up at five．So she did not notice that they were riding off the main road and into The Chase，the oldest wood in England．It began to get foggy，and finally Alec admitted honestly that he was lost．
　　‘Put me down here，sir，’cried Tess at once．‘Let me walk home from here．How wrong of you to bring me away from the main road！I knew I shouldn't trust you！’
　　‘Don't worry，my beauty，’laughed Alec．‘I thought you would enjoy a longer ride on such a lovely night．But I can't let you go．The fog is so bad now that you couldn't possibly find your way．I'll leave you here and go to find out where we are．When I come back，I'll tell you，and you can come with me on horseback or go alone on foot—just as you like．’
　　She agreed to this．‘Shall I hold the horse？’she asked．
　　‘No，he'll stay quiet，’answered Alec．‘By the way， your father has a new horse today．And the children have some new toys．’
　　‘Was it…was it you who gave them？Oh，how good of you！’murmured Tess with a heavy heart．‘I almost wish you hadn't！’
　　‘Tessy，don't you love me just a little now？’
　　‘I'm grateful，’she admitted，‘but I'm afraid I don't…’and slowly she started to cry．
　　‘Now don't cry，my dear．Sit here and wait for me．’He made a bed for the tired girl among the dead leaves， and covered her with his coat．He set off into the fog to find out where he was，and came back to find Tess fast asleep． He saw her in her white dress among the leaves， a pale，shining figure in the dark．He bent down and touched her cheek with his．Everywhere there was darkness and silence．The birds and animals slept，safe in and under the trees．But who was looking after Tess？Who was protecting her innocence？
　　‘Tess！’said d’Urberville，and lay down beside her．The girl was not strong enough to resist him．
　　Why was Tess's girlish purity lost？Why does the wrong man take the wrong woman？Why do the bad so often ruin the good？ Why is beauty damaged by ugliness？Thousands of years of philosophy cannot give us the answers to these questions．These things happen， and have always happened． Perhaps in the past，rolling home after a battle，Tess's ancestors，the real d’Urbervilles，had done the same，even more cruelly，to young country girls．But we cannot accept that that is Tess's fault，and should happen to her．As the people of her village say，‘It was to be．’And from now on，Tess's life was to be completely different．



■ 5



■ Maiden No More



■ 6
　　It was a Sunday morning in late October about four months after Tess's arrival at Trantridge ，and a few weeks after the night ride in The Chase． Carrying a heavy basket and bundle， Tess was walking towards the hills which divided her from the Vale，her place of birth． The scenery and people on this side were very different from those in her village．Marlott people mainly thought and travelled northward and westward， while on this side people were interested in the east and the south． She walked up the same hill which d’Urberville had driven down so wildly that June day．On reaching the top of the hill，Tess paused and looked for a long time at the familiar green world of home．It was always beautiful from here，but since she had last seen it，her view of life had changed．She had learnt that wickedness exists，even where there is beauty，and now she could hardly bear to look down into the Vale．
　　Then she looked behind her and saw a carriage coming up the same hill that she had just climbed，with a man leading the horse．Soon he caught up with her．
　　‘Why did you slip away in secret like that？’ asked d’Urberville breathlessly．‘I've been driving like mad to catch up with you．Just look at my horse！You know nobody would have prevented you from going．I'm going to drive you the rest of the way， if you won't come back with me．
　　‘I won't come back，’she said quietly． ‘I thought so！Well，let me help you up．Give me your basket．’
　　She stepped up into the carriage and sat beside him．She had no fear of him now．The reason for this was also the reason for her sorrow． They drove along，d’Urberville making conversation and Tess thinking her own thoughts．When they approached the village of Marlott a tear rolled down her cheek．
　　‘Why are you crying？’he asked coldly．
　　‘I was only thinking I was born over there．’
　　‘Well， we must all be born somewhere．’
　　‘I wish I had never been born，there or anywhere else！’she said quietly．
　　‘Well，you shouldn't have come to Trantridge if you didn't want to You didn't come for love of me， anyway．’
　　‘That's quite true．If I had ever loved you，if I loved you still，I could not hate myself for my weakness as much as I do now．’
　　He did not look at her．
　　She added，‘I didn't understand your intention until it was too late．’
　　‘That's what every woman says．’
　　‘How dare you say that！’she cried angrily， her eyes flashing at him．‘My God！I could hit you！Did you never think that some women may not only say it but feel it？’
　　‘All right，’he said laughing，‘I am sorry to hurt you．I did wrong—I admit it．Only don't keep accusing me．I am ready to pay for it．You need never work on the farms again．’
　　Her lip lifted slightly as she replied，‘I will not take anything from you！I cannot！’
　　‘One would think you were a queen as well as being one of the real d’Urbervilles！ Well，Tess dear，I suppose I'm a bad sort of man． I've always been one， and I always will be one． But I promise I won't be bad to you again． And if anything should happen—you understand—if you are in any trouble or need anything，just drop me a line and I'll send by return whatever you want．’
　　She stepped down from the carriage and was going to leave him，when he stopped her and said，‘You're not going to turn away from me like that，dear？Gome，let me kiss you！’
　　‘If you wish，’she answered coldly． She offered her cool cheek to him，but her eyes rested on a distant tree as if the kiss had nothing to do with her．
　　‘You don't give me your lips，Tess． I'm afraid you'll never love me．’
　　It's true． I have never loved you，and I never can．’She added sadly，‘Perhaps I should tell a lie and then I could lead a comfortable life．But I have enough honour not to tell that lie．If I loved you，I might have a very good reason to tell you so．But I don't．’
　　Alec sighed heavily，as if this scene were depressing him．
　　‘well，you're very sad，Tess，and you have no reason to be．You're still the prettiest girl for miles around． Will you come back with me？ Say you will！’
　　‘Never，never！I've made up my mind， and I won't come．’
　　‘Then goodbye！’and Alec jumped up into his carriage and drove off．
　　Tess did not watch him go，but continued her walk alone． It was still early in the day and the sun was not yet giving any warmth．Tess felt even sadder than the autumn sadness which surrounded her．
　　But soon a man came up behind her，a man with a pot of red paint in his hand．
　　‘Good morning，’he said， and offered to carry her basket．
　　‘You're up early on a Sunday，’he continued．
　　‘Yes，’said Tess．
　　‘A day of rest for most people， although I do more real work today than in the rest of the week put together．’
　　‘Do you？’
　　‘In the week I work for man，but on Sunday I work for God．That's better work，don't you think？ Wait a moment，I have something to do here．’He stopped at a gate， and in large red letters on the middle bar of the gate he painted some words from the Bible：
　　PUNISHMENT AWAITS YOU
　　In the soft air，against the gentle green of the trees and the peaceful fields， these great red words stared at Tess． They pointed a finger at her．This man was a stranger and could not know her story， but the words accused her．
　　‘Do you believe what you paint？’she asked in a low voice．
　　‘Do I believe those words？Do I believe I am alive！’
　　‘But，’she whispered，trembling，‘suppose you were forced to do wrong？’
　　He shook his head．‘I can't answer that question．I paint the words and leave others to think about them in their own hearts．’
　　‘I think they are horrible words！’cried Tess．‘I'll take my basket and go on now， and she walked away from him，her heart beating fast．‘I don't believe God said those things！’she thought，as she reached her village．
　　There was smoke coming from her father's chimney， but seeing the inside of the cottage made her heart ache．It was as poor as ever．Her mother jumped up，surprised to see her．
　　‘Well，my dear Tess!’she said，kissing her．‘How are you？ Have you come home to be married？’
　　‘No， not for that， mother．’
　　‘What，isn't your cousin going to marry you？’
　　‘He's not my cousin， and he's not going to marry me．’
　　Her mother looked at her closely．‘Come，you haven't told me everything．’
　　Then Tess went up to her mother，put her head on Joan's shoulder，and told her the whole story．
　　‘And you haven't persuaded him to marry you！’cried Joan． ‘What's the good of going there？ Why didn't you think of doing some good for your family instead of thinking only of yourself？’
　　Tess was confused． Alec had never mentioned marriage to her．But even if he had，she would never have accepted him， because she did not love him．This made her hate herself for what she had done．She would certainly never love him in the future． She did not quite hate him， but did not wish to marry him，even to remain respectable．
　　‘You ought to have been more careful if you didn't want to marry him！’
　　‘Oh mother！’cried the poor girl，her heart breaking．‘Why didn't you warn me about men？I was a child when I left home！I didn't know how dangerous they can be，and you didn't tell me！’
　　‘Well，we must make the best of it，’said her mother．‘It's only human nature， after all．’
　　That afternoon the little cottage was full of Tess's friends， girls who lived in the village and who had missed her while she had been away．They whispered to each other that Tess was sure to marry that handsome gentleman．Fortunately Tess did not hear them．She joined in their laughing and talking，and for a short time almost forgot her shame．
　　But the next day was Monday，the beginning of the working week， when there were no best clothes and no visitors．She awoke with the innocent children asleep around her，she who had lost her innocence． She looked into her future，and grew very depressed． She knew she had to travel on a long，stony road， without help or sympathy． She had nothing to look forward to，and she wanted to die．
　　In the next few weeks， however， she became more cheerful， and went to church one Sunday morning． She loved listening to the well－known tunes， and gave herself up to the beauty of the music．She wondered at the composer's power． From the grave he could make a girl like her， who had never known him，feel extremes of emotion． She sat in a quiet，dark corner listening to the service．But when the village people arrived at church they noticed her and started whispering to each other．She knew what they were saying and realized she could come to church no more．
　　So she spent almost all her time in her bedroom，which she shared with the children． From here she watched the wind， the snow，the rain，beautiful sunsets and full moons，one after another．People began to think she had gone away． She only went out after dark， to walk in the woods and the fields． She was not afraid of the dark or the shadows； it was people she was anxious to avoid． She was at home on the lonely hills， but she felt guilty surrounded by innocent nature． When it rained， she thought nature was crying at her weakness，and when the midnight wind blew she thought nature was angry with her．But she did not realize that although she had broken an accepted social rule， she had done nothing against nature． She was as innocent as the sleeping birds in the trees，or the small field animals in the hedges．






■ 6



■ 7
　　One day in August the sun was rising through the mist．In a yellow cornfield near Marlott village it shone on two large arms of painted wood．These，with two others below， formed the turning cross of the reaping－machine．It was ready for today's harvest． A group of men and a group of women came down the road at sunrise． As they walked along， their heads were in the sun while their feet were in the shadow of the hedge．They went into the field．
　　Soon there came a sound like the love－making of the grasshopper．The machine had begun， and three horses pulled it slowly along the field．Its arms turned，bright in the sunlight．Gradually the area of standing corn was reduced．So was the living space of the small field animals，who crowded together，not knowing that they could not escape the machine in the end．
　　The harvesters followed the machine， picking and tying up bundles of corn． The girls were perhaps more interesting to look at．They wore large cotton hats to keep off the sun， and gloves to protect their hands from the corn．The prettiest was the one in the pale pink jacket，who never looked around her as she worked．She moved forward， bending and tying like a machine．Occasionally she stood up to rest．Then her face could be seen：a lovely young face，with deep dark eyes and long heavy curling hair．Her cheeks were paler，her teeth more regular， and her red lips thinner than most country girls’．
　　It was Tess Durbeyfield， or d’Urberville， rather changed， living as a stranger in her home village．She had decided to do outdoor work and earn a little money in the harvest．
　　The work continued all morning，and Tess began to glance towards the hill． At eleven o’clock a group of children came over the hill． Tess blushed a little，but still did not pause in her work．The eldest child carried in her arms a baby in long clothes． Another brought some lunch． The harvesters stopped work，sat down and started to eat and drink．
　　Tess also sat down， some way from the others． She called the girl， her sister， and took the baby from her． Unfastening her dress， and still blushing， she began feeding her child． The men kindly turned away，some of them beginning to smoke． All the other women started to talk and rearrange their hair． When the baby had finished Tess played with him without showing much enthusiasm． Then suddenly she kissed him again and again，as if she could not stop．The baby cried out at the violence of her kisses．
　　‘She loves that child，though she says she hates him and wishes they were both dead，’said one of the women，watching the young mother．
　　‘She'll soon stop saying that，’replied another．‘She'll get used to it．It happens to lots of girls．’．
　　‘Well， it wasn't her fault． She was forced into it that night in The Chase． People heard her sobbing． A certain gentleman might have been punished if somebody had passed by and seen them．’
　　‘It was a pity it happened to her，the prettiest in the village．But that's how it happens！The ugly ones are as safe as houses，aren't they， Jenny？’and the speaker turned to one who was certainly not beautiful．
　　Tess sat there，unaware of their conversation． Her mouth was like a flower， and her eyes were large and soft， sometimes black，blue or grey， sometimes all three colours together． She had spent months regretting her experience and crying over it， but suddenly decided that the past was the past．In a few years her shame，and she herself，would be forgotten． Meanwhile the trees were just as green， and the sun shone just as brightly，as before．Life went on．
　　She most feared what people thought of her， and imagined that they talked constantly about her behind her back．In fact she was not often discussed，and even her friends only thought about her occasionally． Other things of more importance took up their time．If there had been no people around her，Tess would not have made herself so unhappy． She would have accepted the situation as it was．She was miserable，not because she felt unhappy，but because she imagined herself rejected by society．
　　Now she wanted to be useful again， and to work． So she dressed neatly，and helped in the harvest，and looked people calmly in the face，even when holding her baby in her arms．
　　Having eaten her lunch quickly， Tess went back to work with the harvesters in the cornfield until it was dark．They all came home on one of the largest waggons，singing and laughing together．
　　But when Tess reached home， she discovered that the baby had fallen ill that afternoon．He was so small and weak that illness was to be expected，but this still came as a shock to Tess．She forgot the shame surrounding his birth， and only wished passionately to keep him alive．However，it became clear that he was dying．Now Tess had a greater problem． Her baby had not been baptized．
　　Her ideas on religion were not very developed． She had more or less accepted that she would go to hell for her crime，and did not much care what would happen to her after death． But fo her baby it was different． He was dying，and must be saved from hell．
　　It was nearly bedtime， but she rushed downstairs and asked if she could send for the parson． Her father had just returned from the public house， and was at his most sensitive to the shame brought upon his noble name by Tess．He refused to allow the parson in， and locked the door．
　　The family went to sleep．As the night passed， Tess realized，in great misery，that the baby was close to death． She walked feverishly up and down the room，until an idea came to her．
　　‘Ah！Perhaps baby can be saved！Perhaps it will be just the same！’
　　She lit a candle，and woke her young brothers and sisters． Having poured some water into a bowl，she made them kneel around，with their hands together as in church．The children were hardly awake and watched Tess with big round eyes．
　　She looked tall in her long white nightdress， her long dark hair hanging down her back to her waist． Her enthusiasm lit up her face， giving it a beautiful purity—the face which had caused her shame．
　　She picked up the baby． One of the children asked，‘Are you really going to baptize him， Tess？ What's his name going to be？’
　　She had not thought of that， but remembered the story of Adam and Eve in the Bible．Because they did wrong together， God said they would live in sorrow for the rest of their lives．
　　She said firmly，‘SORROW，I baptize you in the name of the Father，and of the Son，and of the Holy Ghost．’
　　She splashed some water on the child，and there was silence．
　　‘Say Amen，children．’
　　‘Amen，’they replied．
　　Tess put her hand into the water，and drew a huge cross upon the baby with her finger． She continued the service in the well－known words， asking for the baby to be protected against the world and against wickedness． Her belief gave her hope；her sweet warm voice rang out the thanks that follow the baptism．The single candle was reflected in her shining eyes like a diamond．The children asked no more questions，but looked up at her in amazement．She seemed almost like a god to them．
　　Poor Sorrow's fight against the world and wickedness was a short one， fortunately perhaps，taking into account his situation． In the blue light of the morning he breathed his last． Tess had been calm since the baptism and she remained calm． She was no longer worried about Sorrow's afterlife．If God did not accept the baptism，she did not value His Heaven，either for herself or for her child．
　　Tess thought a good deal about the baptism， however， and wondered if it might mean that Sorrow could be buried in the churchyard，with a church service． She went to the parson's house after dark， and met him near his gate．
　　‘I should like to ask you something，sir．My baby was very ill，and I wanted you to baptize him， but my father refused to allow it．So I baptized him myself．Now sir， can you tell me this，’and she looked him straight in the eyes，‘ will it be just the same for him as if you had baptized him？’
　　The parson wanted to say no． She had done what should have been his job．But the girl's strong feeling impressed him． The man and the parson fought inside him， and the man won．
　　‘My dear girl，’he said，‘it will be just the same．’
　　‘Then will you bury him in the churchyard？’ she asked quickly．
　　The parson felt trapped． It was a difficult question to answer．‘Ah，that's a different matter，’he said．‘1'm sorry，I cannot．’
　　‘Oh sir！’She took his hand as she spoke．
　　He took it away，shaking his head．
　　‘Then I'll never come to church again！’she cried．‘But perhaps it will be the same for him？ Tell me， have pity on me， poor me，tell me what you really think！’
　　The parson was deeply touched by her emotion． For a surprising moment he forgot the strict rules of his church．
　　‘It will be just the same，’he answered kindly．
　　So the baby was carried in a cheap wooden box to the churchyard at nignt．There is a corner of the churchyard where the grass grows long，and where the suicides，drunks， unbaptized babies and other supposed criminals are laid． Sorrow was buried here，at the cost of a shilling and a pint of beer for the gravedigger．Tess bravely made a little cross and put it at the head of the grave one evening，when she could enter the churchyard without being seen．
　　It is all very well saying that we learn from experience． Tess had certainly learnt from experience，but could not see how to use her knowledge，so painfully gained．
　　So she stayed in her parents’ home during the winter， helping to look after the children， making clothes for them and earning a little money whenever she could．Important dates came round again：the night of her shame in The Chase，the baby's birth and death， her own birthday． One day when she was looking at her pretty face in the mirror，she thought of another date，even more important—her own death． When it came it would swallow up all her prettiness and everything that had happened to her．When was it？It was a day lying hidden among all the other days of the year， so that she noticed nothing when it came round，and did not know what week， month，season or year it would be．
　　In a flash Tess changed from simple girl to complicated woman．Her face was often thoughtful，and there was sometimes a tragic note in her voice．Her eyes grew larger and more expressive．She became a beautiful woman． She had suffered，but had gained a certain self－confidence from her experiences．
　　Although the village people had almost forgotten her trouble， she decided she could never be really happy in Marlott．Trying to claim relationship with the rich d’Urbervilles seemed so foolish and shameful to her． She thought her family would never be respected there again． Even now she felt hope rise within her，hope of finding a place with no family connections and no memories．In escaping from Marlott she intended to destroy the past．Perhaps now she could make up for her crime against society．
　　Consequently she looked hard for work away from Marlott． She finally heard that a dairyman some miles to the south needed a good milkmaid for the summer．Having decided to go there，she promised herself there would be no more hopeless dreams．She would simply be the dairymaid Tess， and nothing more．Even her mother no longer talked about their connection with the noble d’Urbervilles．
　　But in spite of Tess's decision to forget her ancestors， the dairy， called Talbothays，especially attracted her because it was near the former lands of the old d’Urberville family． She would be able to look at them， and not only observe that the noble d’Urberville family had lost its greatness，but also remember that a poor descendant had lost her innocence．She wondered if some good might come of being in the land of her ancestors．Hope and youthful energy rose up in her again，like leaves on a young tree in spring．



■ 7



■ A New Life



■ 8
　　And so it was that on a beautiful morning in May，two to three years after her return from Trantridge，Tess Durbeyfield left home for the second time．She was going in the opposite direction this time．When she reached the first hill，she looked back at Marlott and her father's house with sadness in her heart．
　　She travelled partly by carriage and partly on foot，carrying her basket．Not far to her left she could see the trees which surrounded Kingsbere，with its church where her ancestors lay in their tombs．She could no longer admire or respect them． She almost hated them for ruining her life．Nothing of theirs was left except the old seal and spoon．
　　‘Huh！I have as much of mother as father in me！’she said．
　　‘All my prettiness comes from her，and she was only a dairymaid．’
　　Her walk took two hours，until she reached the hill overlooking the Valley of the Great Dairies． This valley was watered by the river Froom，and produced huge amounts of milk and butter，more even than Tess's Vale of Blackmoor， which was known as the Vale of Little Dairies．
　　As she stood and looked，she realized the valleys were quite different．Here the fields and farms were much larger． She saw more cows at a glance than she had ever seen before．The evening sun shone on their red，white and brown bodies．She thought that this view was perhaps not as beautiful as a view of Blackmoor Vale，which she knew so well．There the sky was deep blue，the smell of the earth was heavy in the air，the streams ran slowly and silently．But this view was more cheerful． Here the air was clear and light， and the river Froom rushed as fast as the shadow of a cloud．
　　Either the change in the quality of the air，or the feeling that she was going to start a new life here， made her feel much happier．She ran along， her hopes and the sunshine warming her．
　　She looked at her best as she ran laughing into the warm wind．The desire for pleasure， which is in every living thing， had finally won over Tess． She was，after all，only a young woman of twenty， who had not finished growing up． No event，however unpleasant，could have marked her for ever． She was young and strong and beautiful， and could not remain sad for long．
　　Her hopes rose higher than ever． She wanted to show how grateful she was for this second chance．She started singing love songs，but found they were not enough to express her feelings．She remembered the Sunday mornings of her girlhood，and sang：‘Oh sun and moon… Oh stars… Oh children of men… Praise the Lord！ Praise Him for ever！’ until she stopped suddenly and murmured， ‘But perhaps I don't quite know the Lord yet．’
　　This was probably a pagan feeling in a religious form． People who live in the country and are close to nature， like Tess，keep many of the pagan ideas of their ancestors in their souls．Religion learned in church comes much later， and does not touch them deeply．
　　Tess was happy to be making her way independently in life． She really wanted to live honestly and work hard，unlike her father．Tess had her mother's energy and the energy of her youth to help her recover from her experience． Women do usually live through such experiences．‘Where there's life there's hope’ is still true for most‘betrayed’women．
　　As Tess，full of enthusiasm，came downhill towards the dairy，she suddenly heard the milking call，again and again， from all parts of the valley．It was half－past four， when the dairy people brought in the cows． Tess followed the red and white animals，with their great bags of milk under them，into the farmyard． She saw the long sheds， and the wooden posts， shining and smooth where the cows had rubbed against them over the years． She saw the cows between the posts，the sun throwing their shadows on the wall as carefully as a painter paints a beautiful king or queen．As the cows waited for their turn，the milk fell in drops on the ground．
　　The dairymaids and men had come from their cottages as they saw the cows arriving from the fields． Each girl sat on her three－legged stool as she milked，her right cheek resting on the cow's body，watching Tess arrive．The men milked with their hats low over their eyes and did not see her．One of them was a middle－aged man，the head－dairyman she was looking for．He worked six days a week in his white milking clothes， milking and butter－making， and on the seventh he wore his best suit to take his family proudly to church． Because of this people nearby used to say：
　　Dairyman Dick
　　All the week，
　　On Sundays Mister Richard Crick．
　　Most dairymen are usually bad－tempered at milking time， but Mr Crick was glad to get a new dairymaid at this busy time of the year．So he received Tess warmly and asked her how her family were．
　　‘When I was a boy I knew your part of the country very well，’be said．‘An old woman of ninety—she's dead now but she used to live near here—she once told me there was an ancient noble family of a name like yours，who came from here originally．But I didn't take any notice of an old woman like that．’
　　‘Oh no， that's just a story，’said Tess．
　　Then Mr Crick turned to business．‘You can milk well，my girl？I don't want my cows drying up，especially just now．’
　　‘Oh yes，I can，’answered Tess．
　　He looked at her delicate hands and pale face．
　　‘Quite sure you're strong enough for this sort of life？ It's comfortable enough here for rough country people but it's hard work．’
　　‘Oh yes，I'm strong enough． I'm used to hard work，’Tess insisted．
　　‘Well，have some tea and something to eat．You've had a long journey，’he said kindly．
　　‘No，I'd rather begin milking straight away，’said Tess． ‘I'll just drink a little milk first．’
　　This surprised Dairyman Crick，who appeared never to have thought of milk as a drink．
　　‘Oh，if you can swallow it，have some，’he said，holding the bucket for her to drink from．‘I haven't touched any for years． It would lie in my stomach like a stone，so it would． Now，try that one and see how you get on．’And he pointed to the nearest cow．
　　As soon as Tess was on her stool under the cow， and the milk was pouring between her fingers into the bucket，she really felt that her new life was beginning． As she relaxed，she looked around her．
　　It was a large dairy．There were nearly a hundred milking cows．Dairyman Crick milked six or eight of the difficult ones with his own hands． He could not trust them to the dairymaids， because if the cows were badly milked their milk would simply dry up．
　　For a while there was no more talk among the milkers． Suddenly Mr Crick got up from his stool．
　　We're not getting as much milk from them as usual，’he said．‘We'd better sing them a song， friends， that's the only thing to do．’So the group of milkers started singing，to encourage the cows to give more．
　　Mr Crick went on，‘But I think bulls like music better than cows．Did I tell you all about William Dewy？ On his way home after a wedding he found himself in a field with an angry bull． He took his violin and played some Christmas church music and down went the bull on his knees！ Just like the animals around baby Jesus！ And so William was able to escape．’
　　‘It's a curious story．It takes us back to the past，when belief in God was a living thing．’This unusual remark came from under a cow．
　　‘Well， it's quite true， sir， believe it or not．I knew the man well，’said Mr Crick．
　　‘Oh yes， I'm sure it's true，’said the man behind the brown cow．Tess could not see his face，and could not understand why the head－dairyman himself should call him sir．The man stayed under the cow long enough to milk three，at times saying something angrily to himself．Then he stood up， stretching his arms．Tess could now see him clearly． He wore the clothes of a dairyman but underneath he was quite different．He looked educated and gentlemanly．
　　But now she realized that she had seen him before． He was one of the three walking brothers who had stopped their walk to admire the May－Day dance in Marlott a few years before． He had danced with some of the other girls but not with her． He had not noticed her and had gone on his way． For a moment she was worried that if he recognized her he might discover her story． But she soon saw he did not remember her at all． Since she had seen him in Marlott，his face had grown more thoughtful． He now had a young man's moustache and beard． From the time he had spent milking one cow，he was clearly a beginner at dairy work．
　　Tess discovered that only two or three of the dairymaids slept in the house，besides herself．They all shared a big bedroom near the cheese room． That night one of the girls insisted on telling Tess about all the people at the dairy． To Tess，half asleep， the whispers seemed to be floating in the air．
　　‘Mr Angel Clare—he's the one who's learning milking— he's a parson's son and thinks a lot and doesn't notice girls． His father is parson at Emminster，some way from here．His sons，except Mr Clare，are going to be parsons too．’
　　Tess gradually fell asleep．






■ 8



■ 9
　　Neither Angel Clare nor his family had originally chosen farming as a profession for him． When he was a boy， people admired his great qualities．Now he was a man， something vague and undecided in his look showed that he had no particular purpose in life．He was the youngest son of a poor parson．One day when he was studying at home， his father discovered that Angel had ordered a book of philosophy， which questioned the Church's teaching． How could his son become a priest if he read such books？ Angel explained that he did not in fact wish to enter the Church like his brothers， because the Church's views were too strict and did not allow free thinking． The simple parson was shocked． He was a man of fixed ideas and a firm believer． And if Angel did not want to become a priest， what was the use of sending him to study at Cambridge？ For the parson the whole point of going to university was to become a minister of God．
　　‘I want to use my mind，’Angel insisted．‘ I want to read philosophy．I want to question my belief，so that what is left after I have questioned it， will be even stronger．’
　　‘But Angel，your mother and I have saved and saved to send you to university like your brothers． But how can we send you there if it is not in the service of God？’
　　So Angel did not have the advantage of a university education． After some years studying at home he decided to learn farming．He thought this kind of work could give him what he most valued，independence and freedom to think．So he came to Talbothays at twenty－six，as a student．
　　At first he stayed up in his room most of the time in the evenings，reading and playing his harp．But he soon preferred to read human nature by taking his meals in the general dining－room with the dairy people． The longer he stayed， the more Clare liked living with these simple country people． No longer did he see them as lacking in intelligence． He realized they were no different from him： he and they were all people walking on the dusty road which ends in death．He began to like working outside． He was learning about nature and about life． He came to know the changing seasons，morning and evening，different winds，waters and mists，shade and silence，and the voices of nature．All this he had never known before．
　　For several days after Tess's arrival，Clare，sitting reading a book，hardly noticed she was there．But one morning at breakfast he was reading music and listening to the tune in his head，when he heard a musical voice which seemed to become part of his tune． He looked round at Tess， seated at the table．
　　‘What a fresh and pure daughter of nature that dairymaid is！’thought Angel．He seemed to remember something about her，something which took him back into a happy past， before decision made his life difficult． This memory made him look more often at Tess than the other dairymaids．



■ 9



■ 10
　　Dairyman Crick insisted that all the dairy people should milk different cows every day， not just their favourites． He was worried that a dairymaid might leave the dairy， and then her cows would not like being milked by a stranger． However， Tess began to find that the cows which came to her usually happened to be her favourites． This made her milking much easier． But she soon realized that it was not by chance， as it was Angel Clare who sent the cows in for milking．
　　‘Mr Clare，you have sent me my favourite cows！’she accused him one morning， blushing．
　　‘Well， it doesn't matter，’ said he．‘ You will always be here to milk them．’
　　‘Do you think so？I hope I shall．But I don't know．’Afterwards she was angry with herself． She had spoken too seriously to him， as if he were involved in her staying or leaving． In the evening after milking she walked in the garden alone， thinking about it．
　　It was a typical summer evening in June． The air was delicate and there was a complete， absolute silence． It was broken by the sound of a harp． The notes floated in the still air， strong and clear． Tess listened like a fascinated bird． She drew near to Clare， who still had not seen her． She was conscious of neither time nor space． The tune moved through her mind and body， bringing tears to her eyes． The waves of colour of the wild flowers mixed with the waves of sound．Angel finished playing， and caught sight of her． She blushed and moved away．
　　‘Why are you going， Tess？’he asked．‘Are you afraid？’
　　‘Oh no， sir， not of outdoor things．’
　　‘But indoors？’
　　‘Well， yes， sir．’
　　‘Life in general？’
　　‘Yes，sir．’
　　‘Ah， so am I，very often． Being alive is rather serious，don't you think so？’
　　‘It is， now you put it like that．’
　　‘All the same， I wouldn't expect a young girl like you to feel that． Why？ Come， tell me．’
　　After a moment's hesitation she answered，‘The trees ask questions with their eyes， don't they？ And you seem to see hundreds of tomorrows all in a line，the first big and clear， the others getting smaller． But they all look fierce and cruel． But you can drive away all these ideas with your music， sir！’
　　He was surprised to find that this dairymaid had such sad thoughts． She was expressing in her own words the ache of modern life． This sadness made her more interesting to him．He did not know that her experience had given her great strength of feeling． Tess， on the other hand， could not understand why a man of religious family， good education and financial independence should feel sorry to be alive． How could this admirable and poetic man have felt， as she did two or three years ago， that he would rather die？ It was true that he was not at present living among gentlemen． But he was studying what he wanted to know， and would become a rich farmer in time． So，as they neither understood each other's secrets， they were both puzzled and waited to find out more．
　　At first Tess regarded Angel as an intelligence rather than a man． She became quite depressed as she realized the distance between her own knowledge and his． One day he asked her why she looked so sad．
　　‘Oh， it's only that I feel I've been wasting my life！ When I see what you know， I feel what a nothing I am！’
　　‘Well， my dear Tess，’ said Angel with some enthusiasm，‘I shall be only too glad to help you study history， for example…’
　　‘I don't know． What's the use of learning that I'm one of a long row， and that my past and future are like thousands of other people's？ But there's one thing I'd like to know—why the sun shines on the good and the bad just the same，’ she said， her voice trembling．
　　‘Oh，Tess，don't be bitter！’Of course he had wondered this himself in the past． But as he looked at her innocent lips， he thought this pure child of nature could only have picked up the question from others． She could not possibly have any guilt in her past．
　　When he had gone， Tess felt again how stupid she must appear to him．She wondered whether she could gain his respect by telling him of her d’Urberville blood． She first asked the dairyman if Mr Clare was interested in old families who had lost their money and land．
　　‘No，’said Mr Crick firmly． ‘He's a rebel， and the one thing he hates is an old family．’After hearing this not very accurate view of Clare's opinions， poor Tess was glad she had not mentioned her ancestors．
　　That summer， Tess and Clare unconsciously studied each other， balanced on the edge of a passion， yet just keeping out of it． But all the time， like two streams in a valley， they were destined to join．Tess had never been so happy as she was now， and perhaps never would be so again． They met continually．They could not help it．They met daily in the half-light， at three o’clock in the morning， just before milking． They felt they were the first two up in the whole world， like Adam and Eve． Tess seemed like a queen to Clare， perhaps because he knew that she was the most beautiful woman walking about at this time of day． Lovely women are usually asleep at midsummer sunrise． But Tess was near， and the rest were nowhere． In the strange light she was no longer a milkmaid， but a vision of woman， the whole of womanhood in one form．
　　One day just after breakfast they all gathered in the milkhouse． The milk was turning in the churn， but the butter would not come．Dairyman Crick was worried．
　　‘Maybe someone in the house is in love，’suggestea his wife．‘That sometimes causes it． D’you remember that maid years ago， and the butter didn't come…？’
　　‘Ah yes， but that wasn't being in love，’replied Mr Crick．‘That was damage to the churn．’He turned to Clare to tell the story．
　　‘Jack Dollop， one of our milkers， got a girl into trouble．One day her mother came looking for him with a great heavy umbrella in her hand．Jack hid in the churn，but she found him and turned it round and round．“ Stop，stop！” cried Jack．“If you promise to marry my daughter！”shouted the mother．And so he did．’
　　Tess， very pale， had gone to the door for some fresh air．Fortunately the butter suddenly came． But Tess remained depressed all afternoon．To the others the story was funny．She alone could see the sorrow in it， and it reminded her of her experience．
　　Tess was first in bed that night， and was half asleep as the other girls undressed． She saw them standing at the window looking at someone in the garden with great interest．
　　‘It's no use you being in love with him any more than me，Retty Priddle，’ said Marian， the eldest．
　　‘There he is again！’cried lzz Huett， a pale girl with dark hair．‘ I would just marry him tomorrow if he asked me，’said Marian， blushing．
　　‘So would I， and more，’murmured Izz．
　　‘And I too，’whispered Retty shyly．
　　‘We can't all marry him，’said Izz．
　　‘We can't anyway，’said Marian．‘He likes Tess Durbeyfield best． I've watched him every day and found it out．’
　　There was a thoughtful silence．
　　‘How silly this all is！’said Izz impatiently． ‘He's a gentleman's son． He won't marry any of us or Tess either！’They all sighed， and crept into their beds， and fell asleep． But Tess， with her deeper feelings， could not sleep． She knew Angel Clare preferred her to the others． She was more attractive， better educated and more womanly． She could keep his affection for her． But should she？ Perhaps the others should have a chance of attracting his attention， and even of marrying him．She had heard from Mrs Crick that Mr Clare had spoken of marrying a country girl to help him farm， milk cows and reap corn．Tess had promised herself she would never marry and would never be tempted to do so． She ought to leave the field open for the other girls．
　　Next morning Dairyman Crick sent all the dairy people out into a field to search for garlic plants． One bite by one cow was enough to make the whole day's butter taste of garlic．It was not by accident that Clare walked next to Tess．
　　‘Don't they look pretty？’she said to him．
　　‘Who？’
　　‘Izzy Huett and Retty．’She had decided that either would make a good farmer's wife．
　　‘Pretty？ Well， yes， I have often thought so．
　　‘They are excellent dairywomen．
　　‘Yes，though not better than you．’Clare observed them．
　　‘She is blushing，’continued Tess bravely，‘because you are looking at her．’She could hardly say‘Marry one of them if you really don't want a fine lady！ Don't think of marrying me！’From now on she tried to avoid spending time with Angel． She gave the other three every chance．



■ 10



■ 11
　　It was July and very hot． The atmosphere of the flat valley hung like a drug over the dairy people， the cows and the trees． It was Sunday morning after milking． Tess and the other three girls dressed quickly to go to Mellstock Church，which was three or four miles away from Talbothays． Heavy thunderstorms had poured down the day before， but today the sun shone brightly and the air was warm and clear．When the girls reached the lowest part of the road to Mellstock， they found it was flooded． In working clothes and boots they would have walked through， but they were wearing Sunday white stockings and thin shoes which they did not want to ruin． The church bell was calling， still a mile away．
　　Suddenly they saw Angel Clare approaching． He had seen them from far away， and had come to help them， one of them in particular．
　　‘I'll carry you through the water， all of you，’he offered．All four blushed as if they had one heart．
　　‘Now， Marian， put your arms round my shoulders． Hold on！’ and Angel walked off with her in his arms． Next was lzz Huett．Her lips were dry with emotion． Angel returned for Retty． While he was picking her up， he glanced at Tess． He could not have said more plainly，‘ It will soon be you and I．’There was an understanding between them．
　　It was now Tess's turn． He picked her up． She was embarrassed to discover her excitement at his nearness．
　　‘Three plain girls to get one beauty，’he whispered．
　　‘They are better women than I，’ she said bravely．
　　‘Not to me，’ said Angel． She blushed． There was silence．Clare stood still and bent his face to hers．
　　‘Oh Tessy！’he said． Her cheeks were pink and she could not look into his eyes． But he respected her modesty and did nothing more． He walked slowly， however， to make the journey as long as possible， and put her down on dry land． Her friends were looking with round thoughtful eyes at them．He said goodbye and went back by the road．
　　The four walked on together． Marian broke the silence by saying，‘No， we have no chance against her！’She looked joylessly at Tess．
　　‘What do you mean？’asked Tess．
　　‘He likes you best， the very best！We saw as he brought you over． He'd have kissed you if you had encouraged him， only a little．’
　　They were no longer cheerful but they were not bitter．They were generous country girls who accept that such things happen．Tess's heart ached．She knew that she loved Angel Clare， perhaps all the more passionately because the others also loved him．And yet that same hungry heart of hers pitied her friends．
　　‘I will never stand in your way！’ she cried to them that evening in the bedroom．‘I don't think he's thinking of marrying， but even if he asked me， I'd refuse him， as I'd refuse any man．’
　　‘Oh why？’they asked．
　　‘I cannot marry！ But I don't think he will choose any of you．
　　So the girls remained friends． They all shared each other's secret． The air in their bedroom was full of their hopeless passion． There was a flame burning the inside of their hearts out． But because they had no hope， they were not jealous of each other．They had even heard that Angel's family were planning for him to marry a neighbour's daughter． Tess no longer attached any importance to Clare's interest in her．It was a passing summer attraction， nothing more．
　　The heat grew steadily greater． In this stormy atmosphere even a passing attraction would deepen into love． Everything in nature was ready for love．Clare became gradually more passionately in love with the soft and silent Tess． The fields were dry． Waggons threw up clouds of dust on the road． Cows jumped over gates， chased by flies． Dairyman Crick's sleeves were rolled up from Monday to Saturday， and the milkers milked in the fields for coolness．
　　On one of these afternoons Tess and Angel were milking near each other． Tess used to rest her head on the cow's body，her eyes fixed on a distant field． The sun shone on the beautiful lines of the face． She did not know that Clare had followed her round and sat watching her． How very lovable her face was to him． He had never seen such beautiful lips and teeth， like roses filled with snow．
　　Suddenly Clare jumped up， leaving his bucket to be kicked over by the cow， went quickly towards her， and， kneeling down beside her， took her in his arms． Tess let herself relax in his arms in a moment of joyful surprise． He was on the point of kissing that tempting mouth， but stopped himself．
　　‘Forgive me， Tess dear！’he whispered．‘I ought to have asked．I love you， Tess really！’
　　Tess tried to free herself and her eyes began to fill with tears．
　　‘Why are you crying， my darling？’he asked．
　　‘Oh I don't know！’ she murmured， trying to pull away．
　　‘Well， I've shown my feeling at last， Tess，’he said with a curious sigh， showing that his heart had overcome his reason．‘I do love you dearly and truly． But I shall go no further now．I have surprised you．’
　　She freed herself and they went on milking． Nobody had noticed， and when Dairyman Crick came round there was no sign to show that there was any connection between them． Yet something had happened which was to change their whole world． As a practical man， the dairyman might laugh at love，but love has a habit of changing people's lives．It is a force to be respected．



■ 11



■ The Result



■ 12
　　The nights were as hot as the days． Angel Clare could not sleep． He went out into the darkness to think over what had happened that afternoon． He had come as a student of farming to this dairy， thinking he would be here only a short time． He thought it would be a quiet place． From here he could observe the great world outside， before plunging back into it． But the world outside had lost its interest， and the quiet place was now the centre of all feeling．
　　Clare was a thoughtful， honest man． He knew Tess was not a toy to play with and throw away when finished with． Her life was as important to her as his was to him． He knew he must treat her affection for him seriously． But if they went on meeting every day， their relationship must develop： he could not stop himself．As he had not decided what purpose their relationship should have， he decided that for the moment they should meet as little as possible． But it was not easy to keep to this decision．He was driven towards her by the heat in his blood．
　　He thought he would go and see his family．In less than five months he would have finished his studies here． After a few more months on other farms， he would be ready to start farming himself． Shouldn't a farmer's wife be a woman who understood farming？
　　He rode along the narrow road towards Emminster and his parents’ house． His eyes were looking， not at the road， but at next year． He loved her： ought he to marry her？ What would his mother and brothers say？ What would he himself say two years after the wedding？
　　As he rode into the village， he saw a group of young girls waiting outside the church． Walking quickly to join them was Miss Mercy Chant， only daughter of his father's neighbour．His parents quietly hoped Angel would marry Mercy one day． She was very good at giving Bible classes， but in Angel's mind was the face of the pretty milkmaid who hardly ever thought of God．
　　His family were delighted，though surprised，to see him．Angel was glad to be at home，and yet he did not feel so much part of the family as he used to． His father's religious belief was very strict， but he was a kind， honest man， and fond of his sons． However， he would have been shocked to know of the pagan pleasure in nature and pretty womanhood experienced by Angel． His mother shared his father's religious views and helped in his church work． His brothers seemed rather unimaginative and narrow-minded， although they were both well educated：they felt that anybody outside the Church or university could not be respected．
　　As he walked with his brothers， Angel felt that， however lucky they were to have a university education， neither of them really saw life as it was lived． They thought farming was a poor man's job， not suitable for a gentleman． Angel felt all the more determined to keep to his choice．
　　In the evening he spoke to his father alone after prayers． Mr Clare told his son he had been saving the money he would have spent on his university education for him． This encouraged Angel to ask his father what sort of wife a farmer needed．
　　‘A really Christian woman． Nothing else matters．For example，my neighbour Dr Chant…’
　　‘But isn't the main thing that she should be able to milk cows，churn good butter， value animals and direct farm workers？’
　　Mr Clare had clearly never thought of this before．
　　‘Yes，yes， certainly． But I was going to say that you will never find a purer woman than Mercy Chant． Your mother and I would be very happy if you…’
　　‘Yes，yes，Mercy is good， I know．But，father，don't you think that one who is just as good and pure，and who understands farm life as well as the farmer， would be much better？’
　　After much discussion Angel got down to details．He explained he had met a woman who was ideally suited to be a farmer's wife， who went to church reqularly， who was honest， sensitive， intelligent， graceful， pure as snow， and extremely beautiful．
　　‘Is she of a good family， like Mercy？’ asked his surprised mother， who had come in during the conversation．
　　‘She is not what we call a lady，’ said Angel firmly．‘ She is a cottager's daughter．What's the advantage of good family to me？ My wife will have to work hard and manage with very little money．’
　　‘Mercy is educated． That has its charm，’ said his mother，looking at him through her silver glasses．
　　‘I shall help her with her reading． She will learn fast． She's full of poetry， real poetry． She lives what poets only write．And she is a good Christian girl． I'm sure you'll value her for that．’
　　His parents already doubted Angel's religious belief， so they were almost relieved to hear this of his future wife． They told him not to act in a hurry， but they would like to see her．Although Angel was free to marry or not as he wished， he did not want to hurt his parents， and he accepted their advice．
　　As he set off to return to the dairy and Tess， his father rode with him a little way． Mr Clare was telling his son about the new d’Urberville family who had taken the ancient name and lived near Trantridge． There was a young man and his blind mother． Preaching in the church there one day， Mr Clare had spoken out bravely against the well-known wickedness of young d’Urberville， who， after this， had publicly insulted him when they met later．
　　Angel was angry with d’Urberville．Dear father，you should not let yourself be insulted like that！’
　　‘It doesn't matter to me． I have a duty to point out where people go wrong． Often men have hit me， but then at least they haven't hit their families． And they live to thank me， and praise God．’
　　‘I hope this young man does the same！’ said Angel warmly．‘But it doesn't seem likely．’
　　‘We'll hope anyway，’said Mr Clare．‘Maybe one of my words may grow like a seed in his heart one day．’
　　Angel could not accept his father's narrow religious beliefs，but he loved him for his courage． He remembered that his father had not once asked whether Tess had money or not．This lack of interest in money meant that all the brothers would probably be poor for ever， but Angel still admired his father's belief that money was not important．
　　When he returned to the dairy，in the sleepy afternoon heat， nobody was awake． Getting up so early in the morning meant the milkers really needed a sleep before the afternoon milking． It was three o’clock， time for skimming．There was a slight noise upstairs，then Tess appeared before his eyes．She did not see him， and stretched one arm up above her head．She yawned like a cat and he saw the red inside of her mouth． Her whole soul breathed out physical beauty． Then her eyes flashed as she recognized him．
　　‘Oh Mr Clar！ How you frightened me—I…’she said，looking glad， shy and surprised at the same time．
　　Clare stepped forward to put his arms round her．
　　‘Dear， darling Tessy！’he whispered， putting his face to her warm cheek．‘Don't call me Mr Clare any more！ I've hurried back because of you！’
　　They stood holding each other， the sun warming them through the window He looked deep into her eyes of blue and black and grey． She looked at him as Eve must have looked at Adam．
　　‘I must go skimming，’she said Together they went to the milk-house．
　　Perhaps the Talbothays milk was not very well skimmed that afternoon． Tess was in a dream as she skimmed．The heat of his love made her feel like a plant under a burning sun．
　　‘Theres’ s something very practical that I want to ask you，’he said gently．‘I shall sonn want to marry． Being a farmer， I need a wife who knows all about farms． Will you be that woman， Tessy？’
　　She looked quite worried．She had accepted that she could not help loving him， but she had not expected this result．With bitter pain she replied as she had promised herself she would．
　　‘Oh Mr Clare—I cannot be your wife… I cannot be！’The sound of these words seemed to break her very heart．
　　‘But Tess！’he said， amazed at her answer and holding her still closer．‘Surely you love me？’
　　‘Oh yes， yes！ And I would rather be yours than anybody's in the whole world！ But I cannot marry you！’cried the sweet and honest voice miserably．
　　‘Tess， have， you agreed to marry someone else？’
　　‘No， no！’
　　‘Then why do you refuse me？’
　　‘Your father is a parson， and your mother will want you to marry a lady，’said poor Tess， desperately trying to find an excuse．
　　‘No， certainly not， that's why I went home， to talk to them both．’
　　‘I feel I cannot—never， never！’
　　‘Is it too sudden， my pretty？ I'll give you time． I won't mention it again for a while．’
　　She tried to skim again， but her tears fell so that she could not do it． She could never explain her sadness， even to this her best friend． Clare began to talk more generally， to calm her．He talked about his father's religious views， and the good work he did． He mentioned the insults his father had received from a young man near Trantridge who had a blind mother．
　　Tess now looked hard and worn，and her mouth was tragic．Clare did not notice． They finished skimming and he said to her softly：
　　‘And my question， Tessy？’
　　‘Oh no—no！’ she replied， hopelessly， thinking bitterly of Alec d’Urberville．‘ It can't be！’
　　She went out with the other milkmaids to the cows in the fields． Angel watched her moving freely in the air like a swimmer on a wave．He knew he was right to choose a wife from nature， not from civilization．






■ 12



■ 13
　　Clare was not depressed by Tess's refusal， feeling sure that she would finally accept him． A few days later he asked her again．
　　‘Tess， why did you say “no” so positively？’
　　‘I'm not good enough．’
　　‘Not enough of a fine lady？’
　　‘Yes． Your family would not respect me．’
　　‘You know， you're wrong．My father and mother would．And I don't care about my brothers．’He held her to stop her slipping away．‘You didn't mean it， did you？ I can't work or read or play or anything until I know that you will some day be mine！ Say you will，Tess！’
　　She could only shake her head and look away．
　　‘Then I ought not to hold you， to talk to you like this？Why，Tess？’
　　‘It is for your good，my dearest！ I can't give myself the great happiness of promising to be yours—because I am sure I ought not to！’
　　‘But you will make me happy！’
　　‘Ah， you think so， but you don't know！’
　　After a struggle like this， Tess would go to the fields or her room to cry． Her heart was so strongly on the side of his that she feared she might give way．
　　‘Why doesn't somebody tell him all about me？’she thought．‘It was only forty miles away． Somebody must know！’But nobody knew and nobody told him．
　　Tess's life now had two parts， positive pleasure and positive pain． Every time she and Angel were alone together he would ask her again， and she would refuse． She was keeping her promise to herself， but in her heart of hearts Tess knew that eventually she would accept him．Love and nature both advised her to have him without thinking of complications， to delight in passion without considering future pain．
　　‘I know I shall say yes—I can't help it！’She cried to herself in bed one night．‘But it may kill him when he knows！ Oh， oh！’
　　‘I've got some news for you all， said Dairyman Crick as they sat down to breakfast one Sunday morning．‘It's that Jack Dollop again．’
　　‘The lover in the butter－churn？’ said Angel Clare，looking up from his newspaper．‘And has he married the young milkmaid， as he promised？’
　　‘Not he， sir，’replied the dairyman．‘He's married an older woman who had ￡ 50 a year． They married in a great hurry and then she told him that by marrying she'd lost her￡50 a year！ He only married her for her money too．So now they're always quarrelling．’
　　‘She ought to have told him just before they went to church，’ said Marian．
　　‘She ought to have seen he only wanted her money， and refused him，’said Retty．
　　‘What do you say， my dear？ the dairyman asked Tess．
　　‘I think she ought… to have told him the truth—or else refused him… I don't know，’ replied Tess， who could not swallow her food． She soon left the table and went into the fields， feeling the pain in the story． She had continued to refuse Angel's offers of marriage， but from that Sunday he changed his approach towards her．He looked for her and came to talk to her at every possible moment， at milking， butter-making， cheese-making， among chickens and among pigs．She knew she could not resist much longer． She loved him so passionately， and he was so like a god in her eyes． He treated her as if he would love and defend her under any circumstances． This began to make her feel less afraid about agreeing to marry him， and telling him the truth about herself．
　　The days were shorter now， and in the mornings the dairy worked by candlelight．One morning between three and four she ran up to Clare's room to wake him， before waking the others． Having dressed， she was about to go downstairs when Angel came out of his room and stopped her．
　　‘Now， miss，’he said firmly．‘You must give me an answer or I shall have to leave the house． You aren't safe with me． I saw you just now in your nightdress． Well？ Is it yes at last？’
　　‘I really will think seriously about it，Mr Clare．’
　　‘Call me Angel then， and not Mr Clare． Why not Angel dearest？’
　　‘It would mean I agree， wouldn't it？’
　　‘It would only mean you love me， and you did admit that long ago．’
　　‘Very well then， Angel dearest，if I must，’she murmured，smiling． Clare could not resist kissing her warm cheek．
　　After milking and skimming， all the dairy people went outside． Tess generously tried for the last time to interest Angel in the other dairymaids．
　　‘There's more in those three than you think， she said．
　　‘Any of them would make you a better wife than I could． And perhaps they love you as much as I do—almost．’
　　‘Oh Tessy！’ he cried impatiently． She was so relieved to hear this that she could not make any further self-sacrifice．She knew that this day would decide it．
　　In the late afternoon Angel Clare offered to drive the waggon with its buckets of milk to the station． He persuaded Tess to go with him．
　　At first there was silence as they drove along the quiet road，simply enjoying being close to each other．Soon drops of rain started falling．Tess's cheeks were pink and her long hair was wet．She had no jacket， and crept close to Clare． She held an old piece of cloth over them both to keep the rain off．
　　‘Well， dear，’ said Angel，‘ what about my question？’
　　‘I'll answer you soon．’
　　‘Before we get home？’
　　‘I'll try．’
　　They passed an old house． Angel explained that it was an interesting place which belonged to the ancient family of the d’Urbervilles．
　　‘It's very sad when a noble family dies out，’he said．
　　‘Yes，’ said Tess．
　　At last they reached the station and watched the milk being lifted on to the train． Tess was fascinated．
　　‘Londoners will drink it for breakfast， won't they？ People who don't know we drove for miles in the rain so that it might reach them in time．’
　　‘That's true， but we drove a little for our own reasons too．Now Tess，’ he said anxiously， as they drove away into the night，‘your heart belongs to me．Why can't you give me your hand as well？’
　　‘My only reason is you… I have something to tell you—I must fell you about my past life！’
　　‘Tell me if you want to， dearest．I expect you have had as many experiences as that flower over there！’
　　‘I grew up in Marlott． And at school they said I would make a good teacher． But there was trouble in my family．Father didn't work very hard and he drank a little．’
　　‘Poor child！That's nothing new．’ He held her more closely to his side．
　　‘And there is something unusual about me． I…I am not a Durbeyfield， but a d’Urberville． I'm a descendant of the same family who owned that house we passed．’
　　‘A d’Urberville！ And is that the whole story， Tess？’
　　‘Yes，’she answered faintly．
　　‘Well， why should I love you less because of that？’
　　‘The dairyman told me you hated old families．’
　　He laughed．‘Well， I hate the idea that noble blood should be more important than anything else． But I am really very interested in your news． What do you think of it？’
　　‘I think it's sad， especially here， to see the fields which once belonged to my ancestors．’
　　‘So that's the awful secret！’
　　She had not told him．At the last moment she had not been brave enough．
　　Angel was delighted．‘You see，Tess，society likes a noble name，and will accept you better as my wife，because you are a d’Urberville． Even my mother will like you better． You must use the name of d’Urberville from this very day．’
　　‘I like the other name best．’
　　‘But you must！ By the way， there's someone who has taken the d’Urberville name near The Chase． Yes， he's the man who insulted my father． How strange！’
　　‘Angel， I would rather not take that name！’
　　‘Now then，Teresa d’Urberville， I've got you！Take my name and you will escape yours！’
　　‘If it is sure to make you happy and you do wish to marry me very very much…’
　　‘I do， dearest， of course！Say you will be mine for ever！’
　　He held her and kissed her．
　　‘Yes！’No sooner had she said it than she burst into a dry hard sobbing． Angel was surprised．
　　‘Why are you crying？’
　　‘I'm crying because I promised I would die unmarried！ Oh，I sometimes wish I had never been born！’
　　‘Tess，how could you wish that if you really loved me？I wish you could prove your love in some way．’
　　‘Will this prove it more？’cried Tess desperately， holding him close and kissing him． For the first time Clare learnt what a passionate woman's kisses were like， on the lips of one she loved with all her heart and soul， as Tess loved him．
　　‘There—now do you believe？’she asked， wiping her eyes．
　　‘Yes．I never really doubted—never！’
　　They drove on in the darkness， forming one bundle under the cloth．
　　‘I must write to my mother，’she said．
　　‘Of course，dear child． Where does she live？’
　　‘In Marlott．’
　　‘Ah，then I have seen you before…’
　　‘Yes， when you would not dance with me． Oh， I hope that doesn't mean bad luck！’
　　After this decision Tess wrote an urgent letter to her mother．This was the reply she received：
　　Dear Tess，
　　I hope you are well， as I am．We are all glad to hear you are going to be married soon．But Tess，in answer to your question，whatever you do，don't tell your future husband anything about your past experience．No girl would be so foolish，especially as it is so long ago，and not your fault at all．Remember you promised me you would never tell anybody．Best wishes to your young man．
　　Love from your mother
　　Tess could not accept her mother's view of life，but perhaps Joan was right in this．Silence seemed best for Angel's happiness．So she grew calm，and from October onwards she was completely happy．Clare seemed the perfect guide， thinker，and friend．She saw perfection in his face，his intelligence， and his soul．She dismissed the past from her mind． They spent all their time together，as country people do once they are engaged．In the wonderful autumn afternoons they walked by streams，crossing on little wooden bridges． They saw tiny blue fogs in the shadows of trees and hedges， and at the same time bright sunshine in the fields．The sun was so near the ground that the shadows of Clare and Tess stretched a quarter of a mile ahead of them，like two long pointing fingers．When Clare talked to Tess of their future， and the farm they would have abroad，she could hardly believe that she would be going through the world by his side．Her feeling for him was now the breath and life of Tess's being．It 152 made her forget her past sorrows，but she knew they were waiting like wolves for their moment to attack．
　　One day she cried out to Angel：‘Why didn't you stay and love me when I was sixteen… when you danced in Marlott？ Oh，Why didn't you？’
　　‘Ah yes！If only I had known！But you must not regret so bitterly！Why should you？’
　　Hiding her feelings quickly，she said，‘I would have had four more years of your love than I can ever have now．’
　　They had to tell the dairyman and his wife that they were planning to marry．That night as Tess entered the bedroom， all three dairymaids were waiting for her．
　　‘You are going to marry him！’said Marian．
　　‘Yes，some day，’said Tess．
　　‘Going to marry him，a gentleman！’said Izz．
　　‘It's strange，’said Marian，‘to think Tess will be his wife， not a fine lady，but a girl who lives like us．’
　　‘Do you all hate me for it？’asked Tess in a low voice．
　　‘I want to hate you，but I cannot！’said Retty．
　　‘That's how I feel！’said Marian and Izz．
　　‘He ought to marry one of you，’murmured Tess．‘You are all better than I am！’
　　‘No，no，dear Tess，’they all said．
　　‘I think I ought to make him marry one of you even now！’ she sobbed．they went up to her and calmed her and helped her to bed．Before they went to sleep，Marian whispered，‘You will think of us when you are his wife，Tess，and how we did not hate you，because we did not expect to be chosen by him．’
　　The girls did not know that Tess cried even more at this， and that she decided she would tell Angel all her history．
　　Because of this，she would not set a date for the wedding． She wanted to stay as she was，not move forward into a new life．But soon it was clear that the dairyman did not want so many dairymaids at this time of year．Tess would have to leave the dairy at Christmas．
　　‘I'm afraid I'm glad of it，’said Angel to her，‘because now we must decide when to marry．We can't go on like this for ever．’
　　‘I wish we could．I wish it could be always summer and autumn，with you always loving me！’
　　‘I always shall．’
　　‘Oh，I know you will！Angel，I'll fix the day！’
　　So they decided on 31st December．The wedding was to take place as privately as possible at the dairy．Tess now felt she could not stop things happening，and agreed passively to whatever Angel suggested．In fact Angel's plans were a little hurried．He had not meant to marry so soon．But he wanted to keep her with him，to help her with her reading and studying， so that he could present her proudly as a lady to his parents． He also planned to spend some time studying work in a flour－ mill．They could spend their honeymoon staying in the old farmhouse which had once belonged to the d’Urbervilles， while Angel studied at the mill nearby．
　　The day，the impossible day of their wedding，came closer． His wife，Tess said to herself．Could it ever be？
　　Angel and Tess decided to spend a day together shopping on Christmas Eve．They went into town in a borrowed carriage． The town was full of strangers，who stared at Tess，happy and beautiful on Angel's arm．At the end of the day，Tess was waiting for Angel to bring the horse and carriage，when two men passed her in the street．
　　‘She's a lovely maiden，’one said to his friend．
　　‘She's lovely，yes．But she's no maiden，replied the other．
　　Angel returned at that moment and heard these words． Wildly angry at this insult to Tess，he hit the man in the face． The man said quickly：
　　‘I'm sorry，sir，I must have made a mistake．’
　　Angel accepted this，gave the man some money，said goodnight，and drove off with Tess．The two men went in the opposite direction．
　　‘And was it a mistake？’asked the second man．
　　‘Certainly not，’said his friend．
　　On the way home Tess was very serious．She felt she could not tell him the truth to his face，but there was another way． So she went to her room and wrote a four－page letter describing exactly what had happened three or four years ago． In the night she crept up to Angel's room and pushed the letter under his door．
　　Next morning she looked anxiously at him，but he kissed her as usual．He said nothing about the letter．Had he read it？ Did he forgive her？ Every morning and night he was the same， until finally the wedding day came．
　　Tess had not invited her family from Marlott．Angel had written to his．His brothers had not replied，and his parents wrote that they hoped he was not hurrying into marriage， but that he was old enough to decide for himself．Angel did not mind，because he was planning to introduce Tess to them as a d’Urberville as well as a dairymaid，some months later．
　　Tess was still worried about her confession，and left the crowd of busy people downstairs to creep silently up to Angel's bedroom．There she found her letter unopened，just under the carpet．He had not seen it．She could not let him read it now， in the middle of the preparations．She found him alone for a moment．
　　‘I must confess all my mistakes to you！’she said，trying to keep her words light．
　　‘Not today，my sweet！We'll have plenty of time later on！ I'll confess mine too．’
　　‘Then you really don't want me to？’
　　‘I don't，Tessy，really．’
　　From now on，her one desire，to call him husband，and then if necessary to die，carried her on．She moved in a cloud．
　　There were few people in the church．At one point she let her shoulder touch Clare's arm，to be sure that he was really there．It was only when she came out that she noticed the carriage they were driving back in．She felt she must have seen it in a dream．
　　‘Oh，maybe you know the story of the d’Urberville carriage，’said Angel，‘and this one reminds you of it．In the past a certain d’Urberville committed a crime in his carriage， and since then d’Urbervilles see or hear the old carriage whenever… But it's rather depressing to talk about．’
　　‘Is it when we are going to die，Angel，or is it when we have committed a crime？’
　　‘Now，Tess！’He kissed her．But she had no energy left． She was now Mrs Angel Clare，but wasn't she really Mrs Alexander d’Urberville？
　　Later that afternoon they left the dairy．All the dairy people watched them leave，and Clare kissed the dairymaids goodbye． As he was thanking the dairyman，a cock crowed just in front of him．
　　‘That's bad！’whispered the dairymen to each other． ‘When a cock crows at a husband like that…’and they laughed together behind their hands．
　　‘Go away！’shouted Mr Crick at the cock．Later he said to his wife，‘Why did it have to crow at Mr Clare like that？’
　　‘It only means a change in the weather，’said Mrs Crick， ‘not what you think．That's impossible．’
　　Tess and Angel arrived at the old d’Urberville farmhouse．It was empty，although a woman came to cook and clean for them．They had their tea together，and Clare delighted in eating from the same plate as Tess．Looking at her he thought，‘Do I realize how important I am to this woman？ And how I must look after her？I must never forget to think about her feelings！’
　　It started to rain as it grew dark outside．Finally a man arrived from the dairy with their bags．
　　‘I'm sorry I'm late， sir，’he said，‘but terrible things have been happening at the dairy You remember the cock crowing？ Well，whatever it means，poor little Retty Priddle has tried to drown herself！’
　　‘What happened？’asked Angel．
　　‘Well，after you left，she and Marian walked from one public house to another，drinking．Retty was found in the river，later on．And Marian was found drunk in a field！’
　　‘And Izz？’asked Tess．
　　‘Izz is at home as usual，but very sad and depressed．’
　　As the man left，Tess sat sadly by the fire，looking into it． They were simple innocent girls who had not been loved．It was wicked of her to take all the love without paying for it． She would pay：she would tell，there and then．
　　Angel was sitting beside her，holding her hand．Their faces were red in the firelight．
　　‘This morning，’he said suddenly，‘ we said we would both confess our mistakes．I must tell you something and you must forgive me．Perhaps I ought to have told you before．I've put off telling you，because I didn't want to lose you．’
　　‘Angel，I'm sure I'll forgive you…A wild hope was making Tess's heart beat faster．
　　‘Well，wait a minute．You know how much I believe in goodness and purity But I myself，when I was in London years ago，did wrong with a woman I hardly knew．It lasted two days．I came home and I have never done anything like it since．Do you forgive me？’
　　‘Oh Angel，of course I do！And I am almost glad，because now you can forgive me！I have a confession too．’
　　‘Ah yes，well confess，you wicked little girl！It can hardly be more serious than mine．’
　　‘It can't，no，it can't！’She jumped up joyfully at the hope．
　　‘No，in fact，it is just the same．I will tell you now．’
　　She sat down again．They held hands．The fire burned like a Judgement Day fire．Her shadow rose high on the wall． Putting her head against his，she bravely told the whole story of her meeting with Alec d’Urberville and its results．



■ 13



■ The Woman Pays



■ 14
　　Her story came to an end．She had not raised her voice： she had not cried．But things seemed to change as the story progressed．The fire looked as if it was laughing at her troubles．All the objects around her appeared not to care about her tragic history．And yet it was only a short time since he had been kissing her．Everything looked different now．
　　Clare stirred the fire．It was unnecessary，but he felt he had to do something．He had not really taken in the whole story yet．He stood up．Now as he began to understand the story in its full horror，his face was like an old man's．He made uncertain movements，because everything in his head was vague and uncertain．He could not make himself think clearly．
　　‘Tess！Can I believe this？Are you mad perhaps？My wife， my Tess—you aren't mad，are you？’
　　‘I am not，’she said．
　　‘And yet，’he said，looking strangely at her，‘why didn't you tell me before？Oh yes，you would have told me，in a way，but I stopped you，I remember！’
　　He was talking but could not think at the same time． His brain seemed to have stopped working．He turned away from her．Tess followed him and stood there staring at him with dry eyes．Then she went down on her knees beside him．
　　‘In the name of our love，forgive me！she whispered with a 168 dry mouth．‘I have forgiven you for the same！’
　　And as he did not answer，she said again，
　　‘Forgive me as you are forgiven！I forgive you，Angel！’
　　‘You—yes，you do．’
　　‘But you do not forgive me？’
　　‘Oh，Tess，it's not a question of forgiveness！You were one person，now you are another．How can forgiveness put that right？’
　　He paused，considering this．Then suddenly he started laughing in an unnatural，horrible way．It was like a laugh out of hell．
　　‘Don't—don't！’she cried，her face dead white．‘It kills me，that laugh！Angel，do you know what you're doing to me？I've been hoping，longing，praying to make you happy！’
　　‘I know that．’
　　‘I thought，Angel，that you loved me—me，my very self！’ If you do love me，how can you treat me like this？It frightens me！Having begun to love you，I will love you for ever，in all changes，in all troubles，because you are yourself．I ask no more．Then how can you，my husband，stop loving me？’
　　‘I repeat，the woman I have been loving is not you．’
　　‘But who is she？’
　　‘Another woman in your shape．’
　　Suddenly she realized how he saw her．For him she was a guilty woman pretending to be an innocent one．There was terror in her white face as she saw this．She could not stand， and he stepped forward，thinking she might fall．
　　‘Sit down，’he said gently．‘You are ill，and I am not surprised．’
　　She sat down，her face still full of fear and her eyes wild．
　　‘I don't belong to you any more then，do I，Angel？’she asked helplessly．And at last the tears came．Clare watched her sobbing，and waited until the first violence of her emotion had passed．
　　‘Angel，’she said suddenly in a normal voice，‘am I too wicked for us to live together？’
　　‘I haven't had time to think what we should do．’
　　‘I won't ask you to let me live with you，Angel，because I have no right to！I won't write to tell my family we are married，as I said I would．’
　　‘Won't you？’
　　‘No，I won't do anything unless you order me to．And if you go away，I won't follow you．And if you never speak to me again，I won't ask why，unless you tell me I can．’
　　‘And if I order you to do anything？’
　　‘I'll obey you，even if I have to lie down and die．’
　　‘How good of you．But it seems you have changed．In the past you were keen to look after yourself．Now you are keen to sacrifice yourself．’
　　Clare's bitter words，however，were not fully understood by Tess．She only knew that he was angry with her．She stood silent，not knowing that he was struggling with his love for her She did not observe a large tear rolling slowly down his cheek He was realizing what a change Tess's confession had made to his whole life．He had to decide on some action．
　　‘Tess，’he said，as gently as he could，‘I can't stay here just now．I'm going out．’
　　He quietly left the room．Two glasses of wine，ready for their supper，remained untouched on the table．Only two or three hours earlier they had drunk tea from the same cup．
　　As he closed the door behind him，Tess jumped up．He had gone：she could not stay．She put out the candles and followed him The rain was over and the night was now clear．
　　Clare walked slowly and without purpose．His shape was black and frightening She walked just behind him．There was water on the road，where the stars could be seen reflected． Away from the house the road went through the fields．She followed Clare as a dog follows its owner．
　　Eventually Tess could not help speaking to him．
　　‘What have I done？Nothing interferes with my love for you．You don't think I planned it，Angel，do you？I would not deceive you like that！’ ‘H'm， well．No，maybe you would not，but you are not the same．No，not the same But don't make me blame you．’
　　She went on begging for forgiveness．Perhaps she said things that would have been better left to silence．
　　‘Angel！Angel！I was a child when it happened．I knew nothing of men．’
　　‘I admit it was not so much your fault as his．’
　　‘Then won't you forgive me？’
　　‘I do forgive you，but forgiveness isn't everything．’
　　‘And do you love me？’
　　He did not answer this question．
　　‘Oh Angel－my mother says she knows several cases which were worse than mine，and the husband has not minded much …well，he has accepted it at least．And in those cases the woman hasn't loved him as I love you！’
　　‘Don't，Tess，don't argue．Those are just country people's ways．There is a correct way of doing things．I think that parson who discovered you were a d’Urberville should have kept quiet．Perhaps you were weak and could not refuse this man because your ancient noble blood has run thin，because your family is no good any more．I thought you were a child of nature，but you have the worst of your ancient family in you！’
　　Tess accepted his bitterness，not understanding the details． He did not love her as he had done，and nothing else mattered．
　　They went on again in silence．They walked slowly for hours，with sad anxious faces，not talking，one behind the other，like a funeral procession． Tess said to her husband：
　　‘I don't want to cause you sadness all your life．The river is down there．I can put an end to myself in it．I'm not afraid．’
　　‘Don't talk like that．Do what I ask，go back to the house and go to bed．’
　　‘I will，’she said obediently．
　　When she returned to the house，she found everything as they had left it and the fire still burning She went to the bedroom．There was a mistletoe branch hanging above the bed． Now she understood why Angel had brought a strange parcel with him．It was to surprise her．He had delightedly hung it there．Now it looked foolish and out of place．
　　As she had nothing more to fear，and nothing more to hope for，she lay down．In a few moments lonely Tess was asleep， in the bedroom once used by the young wives of her ancestor．
　　Later on that night Clare also came back to the house．He prepared a bed downstairs，but crept shoeless upstairs to see if Tess was asleep．He was relieved to see her sleeping deeply． And yet he felt he alone had the whole worry of what action to take，and the responsibility for her life as well as his．He turned away from her door，and then turned back again， pulled by his love for her．But his eye was caught by a painting on the wall of one of Tess's ancestors，a proud fierce woman， who looked as if she hated and wanted to deceive all men．He thought she and Tess looked alike．That was enough to stop him，and he went downstairs to his lonely bed．
　　He looked calm and cold，full of self-control．His face showed he had fought against passion and won，but did not like being the winner．He still found it difficult to accept that Tess，the pure village maiden，was not what she seemed． How unexpected life could be！He put out the candle．The night came in，unconcerned and uninterested，the night which had swallowed up his happiness．






■ 14



■ 15
　　When Clare woke up the next morning，the sky was grey and the sun was not shining．The fireplace in the room was full of cold ashes．The two full glasses of wine still stood untouched on the table．
　　When the cleaning woman came，he sent her away，not wanting a third person in the house He found wood to make a fire，and prepared breakfast．People passing the farmhouse saw the smoke rising from the chimney，and envied the newly- married couple in their happiness．
　　‘Breakfast is ready！’he called upstairs in a normal voice．
　　Tess came down immediately．She was already dressed，but her hands and face were cold．She had no fire in her bedroom， where she had been sitting waiting for his call，and staring at the dying mistletoe．Clare's polite words gave her a moment of hope，which died，however，when she saw his face．
　　They were both，in fact，the ashes of their former fires． After last night's passionate sorrow，they both felt heavy and lacking in energy．
　　Tess went up to Angel，touching him lightly with her fingers．Was this really the man who once loved her？ Her eyes were bright，her cheeks still round，but her lips were pale． She looked absolutely pure．Angel looked at her in wonder． ‘Tess！Say it isn't true！It can't be true！’ ‘It is true．’
　　‘Every word？’
　　‘Every word．’
　　He world almost have preferred her to lie，so that he could believe her blindly，but she repeated，‘It is true．’
　　‘Is he living？’asked Angel．
　　‘The baby died．’
　　‘But the man？’
　　‘He is alive．’
　　‘Is he in England？’
　　‘Yes．’
　　Despair passed over Clare's face．He moved vaguely around the room．
　　‘Look，’he said，‘I thought—any man would have thought－that if I didn't look for knowledge，good family， and wealth in a wife，if I sacrificed all that，I would be sure of finding a country girl who was at least pure… but… but I should not accuse you．’
　　Tess understood his feelings perfectly．She saw that he had lost in every way．
　　‘Angel—I would not have married you if I had not known that，after all，there is a way out for you… only I hoped you would never… ’She was close to tears．
　　‘A way out？’
　　‘You can divorce me．’
　　‘Good heavens！How can you be so stupid？How can I divorce you？’
　　‘Can't you，now I have told you everything？’
　　‘Oh Tess，you are so childish！You don't understand the law．No，I can't．’
　　There was shame and misery in Tess's face．
　　‘I thought you could，’she whispered．‘Don't think I planned this！I really believed you could take that way out．Oh，then I ought to have done it last night．But I didn't have the courage．That's just like me！’
　　‘The courage to do what？’he asked．
　　‘To put an end to myself．’
　　‘Where？’
　　‘In the bedroom，under your mistletoe．With the rope from my box．But I couldn't in the end！I was afraid that people would talk and you would suffer from that．’
　　Clare was shaken by this unexpected confession．
　　‘Now，listen．You must never think of such a wicked thing again．Promise me as your husband never to do anything like that．’
　　‘I promise．I see it was wicked．But，Angel，it was to set you free，and to avoid a divorce，which everyone would talk about．But dying by my own hand is too good for me．You，my husband，should kill me．I think I would love you more，if that were possible，if you could bring yourself to do it．I am so much in your way！’
　　‘Quiet！Don't talk about it．’
　　‘Well，just as you wish．I will do whatever you like．’They sat down to breakfast，tired and sad．They did not look at each other and they did not eat much．Angel left soon afterwards to start his studies at the flour－mill nearby．Tess cleared the ashes from the fireplace，cleaned the house and prepared the lunch，waiting for his return．At lunch they talked politely of work at the flour－mill and methods of milling．In the afternoon he went back to the mill，and in the evening he studied his books and papers．Tess felt she was in his way and went to the kitchen．He came to find her there．
　　‘Don't work in the kitchen like this，’he said．‘You're not my servant，you're my wife．’
　　She looked happier．‘You mean，I can think of myself as that？’She asked，trembling．
　　‘What do you mean，Tess？You are my wife，of course．’
　　‘I don't know，she said，with tears in her eyes．‘I told you long ago I wasn't good enough for you．And I'm not good enough！I was right！But you persuaded me！’
　　She turned her back on him，sobbing as if her heart would break．It would have won round any man but Angel Clare．Deep in him lay a hard logic，which had resisted the Church，and now resisted Tess．She accepted his treatment of her as being what she deserved．She would never have thought of criticizing his hardness．To her he was still perfection．
　　Another day passed by in the same way．Only once did Tess try to get closer to her husband．As he was leaving for the flour－mill，she put up her mouth to be kissed．He ignored the invitation，and said goodbye coldly．She felt as if he had hit her．How often had he wanted to kiss her in those happy days at Talbothays！
　　But on his way to the mill Angel regretted his coldness．He wished he had been kinder to her and kissed her once at least．
　　So they lived through another day-together in the same house，but more separately than ever before．Clare was desperately wondering what to do．Tess no longer even hoped for forgiveness．That evening she said bravely：
　　‘I suppose you aren't going to live with me long，are you，Angel？’She found it difficult to control the muscles of her face．
　　‘No．How can we live together as man and wife while that man lives？He is your natural husband，I'm not．If he were dead，that might be different．Anyway，have you thought of the future？have you thought we might have children？They would find out about this．Everybody would talk about it．Can you imagine them growing up under a cloud like that？They would hate you for it．’
　　Tess's head was bent．Her eyes felt so heavy they were almost closed．‘No，I can't ask you to stay with me，’she whispered．‘I hadn't thought of it like that．’
　　She had hoped，as women do，that living together for a time would break down his coldness．Being near him every day was her only hope of winning him back．But she had never imagined she might have children who would reject her．She now remembered how she had criticized her mother for bringing babies into the world without being able to look after them．She realized that she might have made the same mistake as Joan Durbeyfield．She completely accepted Angel's argument．
　　She could have argued that if they went as planned to farm in another country，nobody would know about her past．But perhaps she was right not to argue．A woman knows not only her own sorrow but also her husband's．He might keep the bitterness alive in his heart，even if nobody knew or talked about it at all．She had lost．
　　On the third day she said，‘I accept what you say．We must separate．’
　　‘But what can you do？’
　　‘I can go home．’
　　Clare had not thought of that．‘Can you really？’
　　‘Yes．If I am with you all the time，I may persuade you to stay，against your better judgement．Then you and I would both be sorry．I must go．’
　　‘Right，’said Angel．His face was pale but his voice was determined．
　　Tess was slightly shocked．He had agreed so quickly to her generous offer！
　　‘I didn't like to suggest it，’he said，‘but as you have，I think it's a good idea to part—at least for a while．God knows，we may come togetner again one day！’
　　So they both prepared to leave the following day．That night Tess was woken by a noise in the house．At first she thought Angel was coming to her bedroom，and her heart beat wildly with joy．But then she saw his eyes staring emptily ahead of him，and knew he was walking in his sleep．He came to the middle of her room and said very sadly，‘Dead！Dead！Dead！Poor darling Tess！So sweet，so good，so pure！My wife，dead！’
　　These words，which he would never say when awake，were very sweet to Tess．She would not have moved to save her life．She lay in absolute stillness，trying not to breathe，wondering what he was going to do with her．Her trust in him was complete．
　　He picked her up and carried her to the stairs．Was he going to throw her down？She knew he was leaving her the next day，perhaps for ever．She almost hoped they would fall and die together．
　　He continued downstairs，taking her out of the house towards the river．She had given herself totally up to him， and did not care what happened to her as long as she was with him．They arrived at a place where the river was fast and deep，and Angel started to cross it on the narrow footbridge，still holding Tess．Perhaps he wanted to drown her．Even that would be better than separation．
　　As they crossed，the water rushed fiercely below them．If Tess had moved in his arms，they would both have fallen into the dangerous water．But she had no right to take his life，although her own was worthless，so she stayed still．
　　Angel walked purposefully towards a ruined church near the river．Against the old wall was an empty stone tomb．In this he carefully laid Tess，and kissing her lips，sighed deeply and happily．He immediately lay down on the ground next to the tomb，and looked fast asleep．
　　Tess stepped out of the tomb and managed to persuade Angel to walk back to the house，without waking him．It was very cold outside，and both had only night clothes on．She helped him to his sofa bed in the living room，and he still did not wake up．
　　Next morning he seemed to remember nothing of the night's experiences，and Tess did not refer to his sleepwalking．They finished packing and left the farmhouse，where they had hoped to be so happy．After driving some distance Angel stopped the carriage to get down and continue on foot．Tess was going further on in the carriage．He spoke seriously to her as they separated．
　　‘Now remember，’he said，‘ I am not angry with you，but I cannot bear to live with you at the moment．I will try to accept it．But until I come to you，you should not try to come to me．’
　　The punishment seemed a heavy one to Tess．Had she really deserved this？
　　‘May I write to you？’
　　‘Oh yes，if you are ill or need anything．You probably won't，so I might be the first to write．’
　　‘I agree to the conditions，Angel，because you know best．Only don't make it too much for me to bear！’
　　That was all she said．If she had sobbed or fainted or begged him，he would probably have given way．But she made it easy for him．He gave her some money and they said goodbye．He stood on the road watching the carnage continue up the hill，secretly hoping that Tess would look back．But she was lying half dead with misery inside．He turned to walk on alone， not realizing thai he still loved her．



■ 15



■ 16
　　As the carriage drove on through Blackmoor Vale，Tess now began to awake from her sorrow and wonder how she could face her parents．She left the carriage and came into Marlott on foot．When she entered the little cottage， her mother was doing the washing as usual．
　　‘Why Tess！’she cried when she saw her daughter．‘I thought you were married！Really married this time！’
　　‘Yes，mother，I am．’
　　‘Then where's your husband？’
　　‘Gone away for a time．’
　　‘Gone away！When were you married then？Tuesday，as you said？’
　　‘Yes，mother．’
　　‘Married on Tuesday and today it's only Saturday，and he's gone away！What strange husbands you seem to find，Tess！’
　　‘Mother！’Tess ran across to Joan and put her head on Joan's shoulder．‘You told me I mustn't tell him．But I did-I couldn't help it—and he went away！’
　　‘Oh you fool，you little fool！’cried her mother．
　　‘I know，I know，’sobbed Tess．‘But he was so good！I couldn't lie to him．And if only you knew how much I loved him and how much I wanted to marry him！’
　　‘Well，it's too late now，’said Mrs Durbeyfield．‘Whatever will your father say？ He was very proud of your marriage．He's been telling them at the public house that you'll help his noble family become great again．Oh，there he is now！’
　　Tess ran upstairs，but through the thin walls she could hear the whole story being told to Sir John．
　　‘People will laugh at me in the village！’he said．‘Do you think he really did marry her，Joan？Or is it like the first？’
　　Tess could listen no more．Even her own family did not believe her．She could not stay．She gave her mother half the money which Clare had given her，and told her family she was going to join him．And so she left Marlott again，looking for work．
　　Angel Clare also returned home．He had spent three weeks since his wedding trying to remain calm and continue his studies，but with the disturbing picture of Tess always in his mind．He was beginning to wonder if he had treated her unfairly．She had been so much a part of his plans for the future that he was now thinking of countries where they could farm together．The idea of Brazil attracted him．The countryside，people and habits would be so different．Perhaps they could make a new life there together．So he went back to Emminster to tell his parents his new plan．
　　‘But where's your wife，dear Angel？’cried his mother when he arrived．
　　‘She's at her mother's for the moment．I've come home in rather a hurry，because I've decided to go to Brazil．’
　　‘Brazil！But they're all Roman Catholics there！’
　　‘Are they？I hadn't thought of that．’
　　But Mr and Mrs Clare were even more interested in their son's marriage than in Brazil's religion．
　　‘Angel，we do want to meet your wife．We are not in the least angry about this rather hurried wedding，so why haven't you brought her？It seems strange．’
　　Angel explained that she would be staying at her mother's while he went to Brazil alone to see if the country was suitable．He planned to bring her to meet his parents before he went there a second time，with her．But his mother was disappointed at not seeing Tess．She watched her son as he ate，and asked questions．
　　‘Is she very pretty？’
　　‘She certainly is！’
　　‘And a maiden of course？’
　　‘Of course．’
　　‘I imagine you were her first love？’
　　‘Exactly．’
　　His father asked no questions，but when the moment for evening prayers arrived，he chose a passage from the Bible．
　　‘This passage is very suitable，as you are here，Angel．It is in praise of a pure wife．’
　　‘We shall all think of her as your father reads it，’ added his mother．As they listened to the ancient，beautiful words，Angel felt like crying．
　　His mother said，‘You see，Angel，the perfect woman，the Bible tells us，is a working woman，not a fine lady，a girl just like your wife．A girl who uses her hands and heart and head for others．I wish I could have met her，Angel．As she is pure，she is fine enough for me．’
　　Clare's eyes were full of tears．He quickly said goodnight and went to his room．His mother followed and stood at his door looking anxiously at him．
　　‘Angel，why are you going away so soon？Have you quarrelled with your wife in these three weeks？Angel，is she …is she a woman with a past？’The mother's instinct had found the cause of her son's worries．
　　‘She is totally pure！’he replied，and felt that he had to tell that lie，even if he went to hell there and then for it．
　　‘Then never mind the rest．There are few better things in nature than a pure country girl．’
　　Clare felt furious with Tess，because she had forced him to deceive his parents．Then he remembered her sweet voice， and the touch of her fingers on his face，and her warm breath on his lips．But this well－meaning young man，despite his advanced ideas，was still limited in his thinking．He could not see that Tess was in character as pure as the pure wife in the Bible．
　　The next day Clare left Emminster and began to prepare for his journey to Brazil．One day，returning from doing some business with a farmer，he happened to meet one of the dairymaids from Talbothays，Izz Huett．He knew her secret：she was an honest girl who loved him and who might have made as good a farmer's wife as Tess．He learnt from Izz that，of the other dairymaids，Retty had become ill，and Marian had started drinking．And Izz herself？
　　‘Suppose I had asked you to marry me，Izz？’he asked．
　　‘I would have said“yes”，and you would have had a woman who loved you！’
　　A wild anger took hold of Clare．Society and its rules had trapped him in a corner．Why shouldn't he take his revenge on society？
　　‘I'm going to Brazil，Izz，without Tess．We have separated for personal reasons．I may never be able to love you，but will you come with me？’
　　‘Yes，I will，’said Izz after a pause．
　　‘You know it's wrong in the eyes of the world，don't you？Do you love me very much？More than Tess？’
　　‘I do，yes，oh，I do love you，but not more than Tess．Nobody could！She would have laid down her life for you．’
　　Clare was silent．A sob rose inside him．He heard Izz's words again and again in his head：She would have laid down her life for you．
　　‘I'm sorry，Izz，’he said suddenly．‘Please forget what I said just now！I must be mad！’
　　‘Oh please take me！Oh，I shouldn't have been so honest！’sobbed Izz．
　　‘Izz，by your honesty you have saved me from doing something wicked．Thank you for that．And please forgive me！’
　　And so Angel said goodbye to the miserable girl．But he did not turn towards Tess's village．He continued with his plan，and five days later left the country for Brazil．
　　And so the months passed．Tess found occasional dairy work for the spring and summer．She sent all Angel's money to her family，who as usual had many expenses and hardly any income．She was too proud to ask Angel's family for more money．That winter she went to work at another farm，where Marian was working．Here the earth was poor，and the work was difficult．But Tess did not mind the hard work in the fields．As she and Marian dug out the vegetables in the pouring rain，they talked of Talbothays and of the sunny green fields and of Angel Clare．Tess did not tell Marian everything，so Marian could not understand why the couple were apart．
　　They wrote to Izz，asking her to join them if she had no other work．It was the coldest winter for years，but Tess and Marian had to go on working in the snow．Tess realized that the farmer was the same Trantridge man who had recognized her in the market town，and had been knocked down by Angel．He made her work twice as hard as the others．
　　When Izz came，Tess saw her whispering to Marian．Tess had a feeling it was important．‘Is it about my husband？’she asked Marian later．
　　‘Well yes，Izz said I shouldn't tell．But he asked her to run away to Brazil with him！’
　　Tess's face went as white as the snow on the ground．
　　‘What happened？’
　　‘He changed his mind．But he was going to take her！’
　　Tess burst out crying．‘I must write to him！It's my fault！I shouldn't have left it to him！He said I could write to him！I've been neglecting him！’
　　But in the evening，in her room，she could not finish her letter to him．She looked at her wedding ring，which she wore round her neck in the day，and kept on her finger all night．What kind of husband would ask Izz to go to Brazil with him so soon after parting from his wife？
　　But this new information made her think again of visiting Angel's family in Emminster．She wanted to know why he had not written to her．She could meet his parents，who would surely be kind to her in her loneliness．So she decided to walk there from the farm at Flintcomb－Ash on a Sunday， her only free day．It was fifteen miles each way．She dressed in her best，encouraged by Marian and Izz，who sent her on her way at four o’clock in the morning．The girls sincerely loved Tess and wished for her happiness．It was a year since her wedding，and on that bright cold morning her unspoken hope was to win over her husband's family and so persuade him back to her．
　　Although she started cheerfully，she began to lose her courage as she approached Emminster．The church looked forbidding．Perhaps the rather strict parson would not approve of her travelling so far on a Sunday．But she had to go on．She took off her thick walking boots and hid them behind a tree，changing into her pretty shoes．She would collect the boots on the way out of town．
　　She took a deep breath and rang the bell at the parson's house．Nobody answered．She tried again．Silence．It was almost with relief that she turned and walked away．Then she suddenly remembered that they must all be at church．So she waited in a quiet part of the street until people began to stream out of church．She immediately recognized Angel's brothers and even overheard some of their conversation．
　　‘Poor Angel！’one of them said．‘There's that nice girl，Mercy Chant．Why on earth didn't he marry her instead of rushing into marriage with a dairymaid？’
　　‘It's certainly very strange．But his ideas have always been most odd．’
　　They joined Mercy Chant as she came out of church，and walked together along the road Tess had walked into Emminster．
　　‘Look，here's a pair of old boots，’said one of the brothers，noticing Tess's boots behind the tree．
　　‘Excellent walking boots，I see，’said Miss Chant．‘How wicked to throw them away！Give them to me．I'll find a poor person who would like them．’
　　Tess walked quickly past them，tears running down her face．She continued walking as fast as she could away from Emminster．How unlucky that she had met the sons and not the father！Angel's parents would have taken poor lonely Tess to their hearts immediately，as they did every other lost soul，without thought of family or education or wealth．
　　She grew more and more tired and depressed as she walked the fifteen miles back to Flintcomb－Ash，where only hard work awaited her．But on the way she noticed a crowd listening to a preacher and she stopped for a while to join them．The preacher was describing with enthusiasm how he had been wicked for years and how a certain parson had pointed it out to him：this had gradually turned him from wickedness．But Tess was more shocked by the voice than the words．She moved round behind the crowd to look at his face．As the afternoon sun shone full on him， she recognized Alec d’Urberville．



■ 16



■ A Change Man



■ 17
　　This was the first time she had seen or heard of d’Urberville since she had left Trantridge．And although he stood there openly as a preacher，as a religious man，she still felt afraid of him．He had changed his clothes，his hair，his moustache and his expression，but could she really believe that he had changed his most secret thoughts and beliefs？
　　As soon as she recovered from her surprise，she moved away so that he would not notice her．But he suddenly caught sight of her，and the effect on him was electric．His enthusiasm faded，his voice hesitated，his lips trembled，his eyes dropped in confusion．Tess walked rapidly away along the road．
　　However，as she walked she felt he must be looking at her back as she walked away．And now she knew she could never escape the past，as she had hoped．Reminders of her past would surround her until she died．As she walked uphill she heard footsteps behind her，and，turning，saw that it was the one person in the whole world she did not want to meet this side of the grave．
　　‘Tess！’he said．‘I'm Alec d’Urberville！’
　　‘I see you are，’she said coldly．They walked on together．
　　‘You may wonder why I'm following you．Well，I feel you are the person I would most like to save from hell．So I have come to do that．’
　　‘Have you saved yourself？’Tess asked bitterly．
　　‘God has done it all，not me！I must tell you how I came to believe in Him．Have you ever heard of the parson of Emminster，old Mr Clare？A very strict，sincere man．’
　　‘I have，’said Tess．
　　‘Well，he came to Trantridge once and tried to show me how wicked my life was．I insulted him at the time．But later my mother died，and somehow I began to think about what old Mr Clare said．Since then my one desire has been to help others to understand God too…’
　　‘Don't go on！’cried Tess．‘I can't believe in such a sudden change！I almost hate you for talking to me like this， when you know how you've ruined my life！You enjoy yourself for a while and then you make sure of your place in heaven！’As she spoke she looked him full in the face with her great beautiful eyes．
　　‘Don't look at me like that！’said Alec．‘Your eyes remind me of—well，women's faces have too much power over me．Don't look at me！It might be dangerous for you！’
　　Eventually they came to a crossroads，where a strange stone stood．It was a lonely，unfriendly place，where people did not like to stay for long．Alec stopped here．
　　‘I must go to the right here．I'm preaching at six this evening．Tell me，how has your life been since we last met？’
　　Tess told him about the baby．Alec was shocked．
　　‘You should have told me！But before we part，come，put your hand on this stone．It was once a holy cross．I'm afraid of your power over me．Swear on the cross that you will never tempt me into wickedness！’
　　‘Good God！How can you ask such an unnecessary thing！I don't want to see you ever again！’
　　‘No，but swear it．’
　　Tess placed her hand on the stone and swore．
　　‘I shall pray for you，’called Alec as he walked away．‘Who knows，we may meet again！’
　　Tess went on her way，feeling upset，and soon met a man on the road．He told her that the cross was not religious，but marked the place where a criminal was put to death and buried．Trembling a little at this information，she finally arrived at Flintcomb－Ash．
　　One day the following week when Tess was working in the fields as usual，Alec d’Urberville came to see her．He explained to her that he intended to sell his land at Trantridge and go to help poor people in Africa．
　　‘Will you help me put right the wicked thing I did to you？Will you be my wife？’
　　‘Oh no，sir！’she cried，horrified．
　　‘Why not？’Disappointment was visible in his face．It was not only duty which pushed him to make this offer，but also his old passion for her．
　　‘You know I don't love you，’answered Tess．‘In fact，I love somebody else．’
　　‘Perhaps that is only a passing feeling…’
　　‘No！’
　　‘Yes！Why not？You must tell me！’
　　‘Well，then… I have married him．’
　　‘Ah！’he cried and looked hard at her．
　　‘It's a secret here，’she begged．‘Please don't tell anybody．’
　　‘Who is he？’asked d’Urberville．‘Where is he？Why isn't he here to look after you？What sort of husband can he be，leaving you to work like this？’
　　‘Don't ask！’cried Tess，her eyes flashing．
　　‘Your eyes！’whispered Alec．‘I thought I no longer felt anything for you，but when I look into your eyes…’He took her hand．
　　She pulled it quickly away．
　　‘Go now，please，in the name of your new religion，go！Respect me and my husband！’
　　‘Don't worry，I can control myself．I just hoped that our marriage would take away the bad in both of us．But that plan is no good now．’He walked slowly away，his head bent in thought．
　　The farmer approached at that moment and was angry with Tess for wasting time talking to a stranger．Tess preferred hard words from this man of stone to sweet ones from Alec d’Urberville．For a moment，however，she imagined escaping from her present hard life by marrying Alec，but rejected it immediately．
　　At home that night she began a letter to Clare，telling him of her great love for him．Reading between the lines he would have seen her secret fear for the future．But again she could not finish the letter，thinking of his offer to lzz，and so he never received it．
　　On a Sunday in February she was eating her lunch in the cottage where she lived，when d’Urberville knocked at the door．He rushed in and threw himself into a chair．
　　‘Tess！’he cried desperately．‘I can't help it！I can't stop thinking of you！Pray for me，Tess！’
　　Tess did not pity him．‘I cannot because I don't believe God would change His plans just because I asked Him．’
　　‘Who told you that？’
　　‘My husband．’
　　‘Ah，your dear husband… Tell me what he believes．’
　　Tess explained，as clearly as she could remember，Angel's beliefs．Alec watched her closely．
　　‘The fact is，you just believe whatever he says．That's just like you women！’
　　‘Ah，that's because he knows everything！’Tess replied with enthusiasm．‘What is good enough for him is good enough for me．’
　　‘H'm，interesting，’murmured d’Urberville．‘Perhaps he understands religion better than old Mr Clare．Perhaps he's right not to attach too much importance to the Bible and to fixed ideas．Perhaps I was wrong to become a preacher．Today I should be preaching at half－past two，and here I am！My passion for you was too strong for me！’
　　‘You have let all those people down？They are waiting for you！’
　　‘What do I care？You are the one woman I have always wanted．Why have you tempted me away from religion？I can't resist you！’His black eyes flashed passionately．He advanced towards her．
　　‘I couldn't help your seeing me again！’cried Tess，moving nervously away from him．‘Please leave me！Remember I am married！Remember I can't defend myself！’
　　Alec stopped，turned，and went out without another word．But he went on thinking of Angel's religious logic，as explained by Tess．It seemed to make sense．‘That clever husband doesn't know that his ideas may lead me back to her！’he laughed to himself．
　　In March the threshing－machine came for a day to Flintcomb－Ash．It was a huge red machine which ate all the corn the farm－workers could feed it．Next to it stood the engine which ran it，and the engineer．He lived in a world of fire and smoke，and was permanently black，as if he came from hell．The farmer put Tess next to the threshing－machine，so that she had the hardest and most tiring job of all．She had little chance to talk or rest，and at lunch time was about to start eating when she noticed d’Urberville approaching．He had Changed his parson's clothes and now looked just like the young gentleman she had first met at Trantridge．
　　‘I am here again，you see，’he said，smiling at her．
　　‘Why do you bother me like this？’she cried．
　　‘You trouble me！Your eyes look at me night and day．I can't forget them．Tess，when you told me about that child of ours，my feelings for you became strong again．I have lost interest in religion and it is your fault！’
　　‘You have stopped preaching？’asked Tess，shocked．
　　‘I have．What a lot of stupid people they are to listen to a preacher anyway！And I am convinced that your wonderful husband's views are better than old Parson Clare's．I don't know how I became so enthusiastic！So now，here I am，my love，just as in the old times！’
　　‘Not like that at all，no，now it's different！’she said firmly．‘Oh why couldn't you stay religious？’
　　‘Because you've explained your husband's ideas so well to me that I accept them！Ha ha！But seriously，Tess，you need help．I am here and this husband of yours is not．Come with me！My carriage is waiting the other side of the field！You have tempted me，now share my life for ever！’He put an arm round her waist．Tess was red with anger but said nothing．She picked up a heavy leather glove and hit him in the face with it．It was an action which her ancestors must have often practised．Alec jumped up and wiped the blood from his mouth．
　　‘Remember one thing！’he said angrily，only just controlling himself as he held her by the shoulders．‘Remember，my lady，if you are any man's wife，you are mine！I will have you again！I'll come back for an answer later on！’
　　So he left，and the farm－workers started the afternoon's threshing．It went on until the evening，as the work had to be finished that day．Tess became more and more exhausted and was near to fainting when they finally stopped．Alec d’Urberville，who had been waiting for this moment，appeared at her side．
　　‘You are so weak，’he said，holding her arm．‘I've told the farmer he should not use women for work with the threshing－machine．It's too hard．I'll walk home with you．’
　　‘Oh yes，please do！’murmured Tess，too tired to be afraid of him．‘You are kind sometimes．And at least you wanted to put right the wrong by offering to marry me．’
　　‘If I can't marry you，at least I can help you．I have finished with religion．But you must trust me！I have enough money to help your family and make them comfortable．’
　　‘Have you seen them lately？’asked Tess quickly．‘God knows they need help…but no—no，I can take nothing from you，either for them or for me！Please leave me alone！’
　　As soon as she reached her room she wrote a passionate letter to Angel．My own husband，
　　I must call you that．I must ask you for help—I have no one else！I am so open to temptation，Angel！I cannot tell you who it is．Can't you come to me now，before anything terrible happens？I know you are far away，but I need help！I know I deserved the punishment you gave me，but please，Angel，please be kind to me！If you would come，I could die in your arms！
　　I live only for you．Don't think I shall be bitter because you left me．I am so lonely without you，my darling！
　　Haven't you ever felt one little bit of your love for me at the dairy？I am the same woman you fell in love with then，the very same．As soon as I met you，the past was dead for me．Can't you see this？
　　How silly I was to trust that you would always love me！I ought to have known I couldn't be so lucky．
　　People say I am still rather pretty，Angel．But I don't care about my looks because you are not here．
　　If you won't come to me，could I come to you？I'm so worried！I'm afraid I may fall into some wicked trap．Save me from what threatens me！
　　Your faithful heartbroken
　　Tess






■ 17



■ 18
　　This desperate cry for help eventually arrived at the parson's house in Emminster．Old Mr Clare was pleased．
　　‘I think this letter is from Angel's wife．I hope this will bring him home more quickly．He did say he was planning to come home next month．’
　　‘Dear boy，I hope he will get home safely，’murmured Mrs Clare．‘I still feel he should have gone university like the other two．He should have had the same chance as them，Church or no Church．’
　　This was the only complaint she ever made to her husband．He too was worried that he had been unfair to Angel．They blamed themselves for this unfortunate marriage．If Angel had studied at Cambridge he would never have become a farmer and married a country girl．Still，his more recent letters showed that Angel was planning to come home to fetch her， so perhaps their quarrel，whatever it was， could be settled．
　　Angel himself was at this moment riding across Brazil towards the coast．He had never completely recovered from the serious illness he had had when he first arrived．He was not as strong as before，and looked much older．The country had been a disappointment to him．Many farmers had come here from England hoping to make their fortune，and had died in the fields or on the roads．He knew now he could not farm here．
　　His attitude to life had changed during this time． He began to look again at what was right and wrong．He began to see that a person should be judged not only on what he has done but also on what he wanted to do．He began to think that he had perhaps been unfair to Tess，and he thought about her with growing affection．
　　He wondered why she had not written．He forgot that he had told her not to write first．He did not realize that she was obeying his orders exactly，although it was breaking her heart．
　　On his journey，he travelled with another Englishman．They were both depressed and both told each other their problems．The stranger was older and more experienced than Angel．He had a different，more open approach to life．He told Angel clearly that he was wrong in parting from Tess．
　　The next day they got wet in a thunderstorm．The stranger fell ill and died a few days later．Death came as no surprise in that unfriendly land．Clare buried him，and continued his journey．The man's words were somehow given greater importance by his unexpected death，and suddenly Clare felt ashamed．Tess had committed no crime． He should believe in her character，and not object to a past action she could not avoid．He remembered the words of Izz Huett：She would have laid down her life for you．No woman could do more．How she had looked at him on their wedding day—as if he were a god！And during that terrible evening by the fireside，when she told him her story，how desperately sad she had been to realize he might not love her any more．
　　Meanwhile Tess was not hopeful that Angel would come in answer to her letter．The past had not changed，so he might not change either．Nevertheless she spent her spare time preparing for his possible return，practising singing the songs he used to like，tears rolling down her cheeks all the while．
　　One evening she was in the cottage as usual when there was a knock at the door．A tall thin girl came in and Tess recognized her young sister Liza－Lu．
　　‘Liza－Lu！’said Tess．‘What's the matter？’
　　‘Mother is very ill，’her sister said seriously，‘and father is not well either and says a man of such noble family shouldn't have to work．So we don't know what to do．’
　　Tess thought for a moment．She realized she had to go home immediately，although her time was not yet up at the farm．She left her sister to rest for a while，and she herself set off at once with her possessions in a basket．
　　Although it was night and she had a fifteen－mile walk， she felt quite safe．She was only worried about her mother， and did not notice the strange shapes of trees and hedges in the darkness．At three in the morning she passed the field where she had first seen Angel Clare，and felt again the disappointment when he did not dance with her．And when she saw the family cottage， it seemed to be part of her body and life，as it always did．
　　She found her mother recovering from her illness，and took over as head of the household．Her father did not seem ill，and had a new plan for earning money．
　　‘I'm going to find all the historians round here，’he said，‘and get them to pay money to keep me going．After all，they pay to look after old ruins，and I'm of historical interest．I think they'll be pleased to do it！’
　　Tess did not have time to answer．She nursed her mother，fed the children，and worked in the garden，planting vegetables for next year．She enjoyed working outside，among her neighbours．One evening when it was almost dark，she was digging happily in the vegetable garden，some distance from the cottage．It was a clear，fresh night，with smoke blowing about from small fires in the gardens．Suddenly she saw a man's face in the light of a fire．It was d’Urberville！She gasped and stepped back，her face pale．
　　‘What are you doing here？’
　　‘My dear Tess，I just want to help you，to see you． Have you finished at that farm？’
　　‘Yes，I have．’
　　‘Where are you going next？To join your dear husband？’
　　‘Oh，I don't know！’she said bitterly．‘I have no husband！’
　　‘That is quite true in one way．But you have a true friend．When you go back to your cottage，you'll see what I've done for you．’
　　‘Oh Alec，I wish you wouldn't give me anything！I—I have enough，I—I just don't want to live at all！’Her tears fell as she started digging again．When she looked round，d’Urberville had left．
　　On her way back one of her sisters rushed towards her shouting，‘Tess！Tess！Mother is much better but father is dead！’
　　‘But father was only a little bit ill！’said Tess，trying to take in the news．
　　‘He dropped down just now，and the doctor said there was no hope for him because it's his heart！’
　　Poor John Durbeyfield's death had more importance than his family realized at first．The cottage was in his name．On his death the farmer who owned it decided to put farm workers in it，and told the Durbeyfields to leave．They were not much respected in the village because of John's laziness．Tess also felt guilty that her presence might have influenced the farmer．The village people clearly thought she was not a good example for their children．
　　So on Lady Day the Durbeyfields had to leave their old home．The night before they left，d’Urberville came to visit Tess，to offer her and her family a little house on his land at Trantridge．Her mother could look after the chickens，and he would pay for the children to go to school．Tess firmly rejected his offer．But when he had gone，for the first time a feeling of anger rose in her against her husband．She had never intended to do wrong and he had punished her too hard！She passionately wrote these few words to him：
　　Oh why have you treated me so badly，Angel？I do not deserve it．You are cruel！I intend to forget you．You have been so unfair to me！
　　T
　　She ran out and posted it before she could change her mind．
　　‘I see there's been a visitor，’said her mother，coming into the living room later．‘Your husband， was it？’
　　‘No，it wasn't him．He'll never，never come，’said Tess hopelessly．She had said it was not her husband，but she was feeling more and more that d’Urberville was physically her husband．
　　Next day their possessions were put on a waggon and taken to Kingsbere．Mrs Durbeyfield had booked rooms there，as it was the family home of the d’Urbervilles，and she still hoped some good would come of belonging to the ancient family．But as they approached Kingsbere after a long and tiring day's journey，a man came to tell them there were no rooms available．Tess and her mother unloaded the waggon，and left the children and furniture near the churchyard wall，while they looked for somewhere to stay．But all the rooms were full．
　　Tess looked desperately at the pile of their possessions． In the cold sunlight of this spring evening the furniture looked old and the pots looked worn．
　　‘Tombs belong to families for ever，don't they？’asked her mother brightly，having looked round the churchyard．‘Well，that's where we'll stay，children，until the place of your ancestors finds us some shelter！’
　　Tess helped her mother move the big bed against the church wall．Underground were the tombs of the d’Urbervilles，and at the head of the bed was a beautiful old window，in which the symbols on the Durbeyfield seal and spoon could be seen．The children were put to bed all together for warmth and comfort．
　　‘Tomorrow we'll find somewhere better！’said Joan cheerfully．‘But Tess，what's the good of you playing at marrying gentlemen， if it leaves us like this！’
　　Tess went inside the ancient church and stared sadly at the tombs of her ancestors．She thought she saw a movement and turned to look again at a stone figure lying on a tomb．When she saw it was Alec d’Urberville lying there，she almost fainted．
　　‘I'm going to help you，’he said，jumping up and smiling at her．‘You'll see that I'm more useful than a real d’Urberville．I'll see your mother．You'll thank me for this！’As he brushed past her，she dropped her head on to the cold stone of the tomb．
　　‘Why am I on the wrong side of this stone？’she whispered．
　　Marian and Izz had seen Tess moving house with her family，and knew what a difficult position she was in．They generously hoped she would one day be happy with Angel again，and were afraid for her，knowing that Alec d’Urberville was constantly tempting her．They decided to write a letter to Angel Clare，to inform him of the dangerous situation his wife was in．This is what they wrote：
　　Dear Sir，
　　Watch out for your wife if you love her as much as she loves you．She is in danger from an enemy in the shape of a friend．A woman's strength cannot last for ever，and water，if it drops continually，will wear away a stone—yes，even a diamond．
　　From two well－wishers



■ 18



■ The End



■ 19
　　It was evening in the parson's house at Emminster．Mr and Mrs Clare were waiting anxiously for Angel's return．
　　‘He won't be here yet，my dear，’said old Mr Clare，as his wife went to the front door for the tenth time．‘Remember his train doesn't come in till six o'clock，and then he has to ride ten miles on our old horse．’
　　‘But he used to do it in an hour，’said his wife impatiently．Both knew it was useless to talk about it，and the only thing to do was wait．
　　When they heard footsteps they rushed outside to meet the shape in the darkness．
　　‘Oh my boy，my boy，home at last！’cried Mrs Clare，who at that moment cared no more for Angel's lack of religion than for the dust on his clothes．What woman，in fact，however firm her beliefs，would not sacrifice her religion for her children？Nothing was more important to Mrs Clare than Angel's happiness．
　　But as soon as they reached the living room，she saw his face clearly in the light of the candles．She gave a cry and turned away in sorrow．‘Oh，it's not the Angel who went away！’
　　Even his father was shocked to see the change in his son．They would not have recognized him if they had passed him in the street．The cruel climate and hard work had aged him by twenty years．He was like a shadow，thin and bony，with no spring in his step and no enthusiasm in his eyes．
　　‘I was ill over there，’he said，noticing his parents concern．He had to sit down，being weak after his journey．
　　‘Has any letter come for me？’he asked eagerly．‘The last one…’
　　‘From your wife？’
　　‘Yes．I didn't get it until very recently，as I was travelling．If I had received it earlier，I would have come sooner．’
　　They gave him a letter that had been waiting for his arrival．Angel read it rapidly．It was Tess's last letter，short and desperate：
　　Oh why have you treated me so badly，Angel？I do not deserve it．You are cruel！ I intend to forget you．You have been so unfair to me！
　　T
　　‘It is all quite true！’cried Angel hopelessly，throwing down the letter．‘Perhaps she will never take me back！’
　　‘Angel，don't worry so much about a country girl，’said his mother，anxious about her son's state of mind．
　　‘You know，I've never told you，but she is actually a descendant of one of the oldest，noblest families in England，a d'Urberville in fact．And do you know why I left her？How could I be so narrow－minded！I left her because I discovered she was not the pure country girl I thought．She had been seduced by a so－called gentleman．But it wasn't her fault．And I Know now that her whole character is honest and faithful．I must get her back！’
　　After this outburst Angel went to bed early and thought about the situation．In Brazil it had seemed easy to rush straight back into Tess's loving arms whenever he chose to forgive her．However，now he knew she was angry with him for leaving her for so long．He admitted she was right to be angry．So he decided to give her time to think about their relationship，and wrote to her，at Marlott，instead of going to see her．To his surprise he received in reply a note from her mother．
　　Dear Sir，
　　My daughter is not with me at the moment and I don't know when she'll come back．I will let you know when she does．I cannot tell you where she is staying．We don't live in Marlott any more．
　　Yours
　　J．Durbeyfield
　　At first Clare decided to wait for further information from Tess's mother，but then he re－read the letter sent on to him in Brazil，written from Flintcomb－Ash：I live only for you．Don't think I shall be bitter because you left me．I am so lonely without you，my darling！
　　Haven't you ever felt one little bit of your love for me at the dairy？I am the same woman you fell in love with then，the very same．As soon as I met you，the past was dead for me…
　　He was so touched he felt he must go immediately to find her，however angry she and her family might be with him．While he was packing，the letter from Izz and Marian arrived，and made him hurry even more．
　　His search for Tess took him first to Flintcomb－Ash，where he discovered she had never used her married name．He began to realize，too，what hardship she had suffered rather than ask his family for money．Next he travelled to Marlott，but found the Durbeyfield cottage occupied by others．As he left the village he passed the field where he had first seen Tess at the dance．He could not bear to see it，because Tess was not there．In the churchyard he saw a new headstone，on which was written：
　　In memory of John Durbeyfield，rightly d'Urberville，of the once powerful family of that name，and direct descendant of Sir Pagan d'Urberville．Died March 10th，18－
　　A gravedigger noticed Clare looking at it，and called to him，‘Ah sir，that man didn't want to be buried here，but in his ancestors'tombs at Kingsbere．’
　　‘So why wasn't he buried there？’
　　‘No money．In fact，sir，even this headstone has not been paid for．’
　　Clare went immediately to pay the bill for the stone，and set out towards Shaston，where he found Mrs Durbeyfield and her children living in a small house．She seemed embarrassed to see him．
　　‘I'm Tess's husband，’he said awkwardly．‘I want to see her at once．You were going to write and tell me where she is．Is she well？’
　　‘I don't know，sir，but you ought to．’
　　‘You're right．I ought to know that about my own wife．Where is she？’
　　Mrs Durbeyfield would not reply．
　　‘Do you think Tess would want me to try and find her？’
　　‘I don't think she would．’
　　He was turning away，and then he thought of Tess's letter：If you would come，I could die in your arms！I live only for you…I am so lonely without you，my darling！He turned back．
　　‘I'm sure she would！’he said passionately．‘I know her better than you do！’
　　‘I expect you do，sir，for I have never really known her．’
　　‘Please，Mrs Durbeyfield，please tell me where she is！Please be kind to a miserable lonely man！’
　　There was a pause after this cry from the heart．Finally Tess's mother replied in a low voice，‘She is at Sandbourne．’
　　‘Thank you，’he said，relieved．‘Do you need anything？’
　　‘No，thank you，sir，’said Joan Durbeyfield．‘We are well provided for．’
　　Clare took the train to Sandbourne．On his arrival at eleven o'clock in the evening he took a room in a hotel，and walked around the streets，in the hope of meeting Tess．But it was too late to ask anybody．
　　It seemed a strange place to Clare．It was a bright，fashionable holiday town，with parks，flowerbeds and amusements．This new town，a product of modern civilization，had grown up near the ancient Egdon Woods，where the paths over the hills had not changed for a thousand years．
　　He walked up and down the wide streets，trying to admire the modern buildings．He felt confused．The sea murmured，and he thought it was the trees．The trees murmured，and he thought it was the sea．He could not understand what had brought Tess here．This was a town for relaxation，for pleasure，not for a working girl like Tess．There were no cows to milk here，and no vegetables to dig．He looked at the lights in the bedroom windows，and wondered which one was hers．
　　Before going to bed he re－read Tess's passionate letter．He could not sleep that night．At the post office next morning they knew nothing of the names of Clare or Durbeyfield．
　　‘But there is the name of d'Urberville at Mrs Brooks'，’said the postman．
　　‘That's it！’cried Clare，pleased to think she had taken her ancestors’name，as he had suggested．
　　He made his way quickly to Mrs Brooks' house，following the postman's directions．It was a large，impressive house，and he wondered if he should go to the back door，as Tess was probably a servant here．But he rang at the front．Mrs Brooks herself appeared．
　　‘Is Teresa d'Urberville here？’he asked．
　　‘Mrs d'Urberville？’
　　‘Yes．’He felt pleased that she was known there as a married woman．‘Please tell her that a relation wants to see her．Say it's Angel．’
　　‘Mr Angel？’
　　‘No，just Angel．She'll know．’
　　Angel waited in the sitting room，his heart beating painfully．
　　‘Whatever will she think of me？’he thought．‘I look so different，so much older！’He was still weak after his illness．He could hardly stand，and held on to the back of a chair，as she entered the room．
　　He was not prepared for what he saw．Tess was wearing fashionable clothes，and looked even more beautiful than he remembered．He had held out his arms，but they fell to his side，because she stood still in the doorway．He thought she could not bear his changed appearance．
　　‘Tess！’he whispered．His voice was low and breaking with emotion．‘Can you forgive me for going away？Can't you…come to me？Why are you… so beautiful？’
　　‘It is too late，’she said，her voice hard and her eyes shining unnaturally．
　　‘I didn't see you as you really were！Please forgive me，Tessy！’he begged． ‘Too late，too late！’she said，waving her hand impatiently．
　　‘Don't come close，Angel！Keep away！’
　　‘But is it that you don't love me，my dear wife，because I've been ill？I've come to find you．My parents will welcome you！I've told them everything！’
　　‘Yes，yes！But it is too late．’Every moment seemed like an hour to her．She felt as if she was in a dream，trying to escape，but unable to．‘Don't you know what has happened？I waited and waited for you．But you didn't come！And I wrote to you，and you didn't come！He kept on saying you would never come back again，and he was very kind to my family after father's death．He…’
　　‘I don't understand．’
　　‘He has won me back to him．’
　　Clare stared at her．He saw her fashionable clothes．He saw her relaxed，well－fed body．He saw her white，delicate hands．At last he understood，and fell into a chair，as if hit on the head．
　　She continued，‘He is upstairs．I hate him now，because he told me a lie，that you would never return，and you have returned！Will you go away now，Angel，please，and never come back？’
　　They looked at each other without joy and without hope，desperately wanting to be sheltered from reality．
　　‘It's my fault！said Clare．But talking did not help．The Tess he had first loved had separated her body from her soul．Her soul remained and would remain faithful to him for ever．But what happened to her body no longer interested her after he had rejected it．
　　After a few moments of confused reflection，he realized Tess had left the room．His mind was in a fog．He felt very cold and very ill．Somehow he found himself in the street，walking，although he did not know where．
　　Mrs Brooks was not usually curious about her guests．She was too interested in the money they paid her，to ask many questions．However，Angel Clare's visit to her wealthy guests，Mr and Mrs d'Urberville，as she knew them，was unusual enough to interest her．She could hear parts of the conversation between the two lost souls，and when Tess went back upstairs，Mrs Brooks crept quietly up to listen outside the bedroom door．She heard Tess sobbing，and through the keyhole could see her half lying over the breakfast table．
　　‘And then my dear husband came home to me…And it's too late！Because you persuaded me，you with your fine words as you did when you seduced me！You told me he would never come back！But he did！And you helped my family—that's how you persuaded me so cleverly．But when I believed you and came to live with you，he came back！And now I've lost him a second time，and this time for ever！He will hate me now！’She turned her tear－stained face and Mrs Brooks could see how she was suffering．‘And he's dying，he looks as if he's dying！It will be my fault if he dies！You have destroyed my life and his！I can't bear it，I can't！’The man spoke sharply，and after that there was silence．
　　Mrs Brooks went back downstairs to wait until she was called to take their breakfast away．She could hear Tess moving about，and then saw Tess leave the house，fully dressed in her fashionable clothes．Perhaps Mr d'Urberville was still asleep，as he did not like getting up early．Mrs Brooks wondered who this morning's visitor was，and where Mrs d'Urberville had gone so early．
　　Just then she noticed a mark on the ceiling．It seemed to be spreading．It was red，and when she stood on the table and touched it，it looked like blood．She ran up to listen at the bedroom door again．The dead silence was broken only by a regular drip，drip，drip．She ran wildly out into the street and begged a man she knew to come back with her．Together they hurried upstairs and pushed open the bedroom door．The breakfast lay untouched on the table，but the large knife was missing．They found it in Alec d'Urberville's heart．He lay on the bed，pale，fixed，dead，still bleeding．Soon the news spread all over Sandbourne that Mrs Brooks' guest had been killed by his young wife．






■ 19



■ 20
　　Meavwhile Angel Clare returned to his hotel，and sat for a while over breakfast，staring into space．A note arrived from his mother，saying that his brother Cuthbert was going to marry Mercy Chant．Clare threw away the paper．At last he got up，paid the bill and went to the railway station But he could not sit patiently and wait for the next train，in an hour's time．He had nothing to wish for in life，and nobody to love He was in no hurry，but just wanted to get out of that town as soon as possible．
　　So he started walking along the road out of town．The road was open，and dropped down to cross a valley．When he was climbing the far side of the valley，he stopped for breath，and something made him turn round．There was a small black figure in the distance－a human figure，running Clare waited．It looked like a woman，but he never imagined that it could be his wife until she came close and he saw it was less．
　　‘I saw you—turn on to the road－from the station—and I've been following you all this way！’She was pale，breathless and trembling．He did not question her but took her arm and helped her along．They took a footpath under some trees，to avoid being seen．
　　‘Angel，’she said，‘do you know why I've been running after you？To tell you that I've killed him！’There was a pitiful smile on her white face as she spoke．
　　‘What!’he cried，thinking her mind was disturbed．
　　‘I don't know how I did it，’she said．‘I had to do it，for you and me，Angel．I was afraid long ago，when I hit him in the mouth with that heavy glove，that I might kill him one day．He has come between us and ruined our lives．I never loved him at all，Angel．You believe me，don't you？Oh，why did you go away，when I loved you so much？But I don't blame you，Angel．Only，will you forgive me now？I could not bear losing you any longer，I had to kill him．Say you love me now，say you do！’
　　‘Oh，I do love you，Tess，I do．It has all come back！’he said，holding her tightly in his arms．‘But what do you mean，you've killed him？’
　　‘He is dead．He heard me crying about you，and he called you rude names．I couldn't bear it．So I killed him．’
　　Eventually Angel came to believe that she probably had killed d'Urberville．He was amazed at the strength of her feeling，and this，it seemed，had made her forget the difference between right and wrong．She did not seem to realize what she had done，and laid her head on his shoulder，crying with happiness．He wondered if the bad blood of the d'Urbervilles was to blame for this moment of madness．
　　However，he knew he could not leave her now．She expected him to protect her．And at last，Clare felt nothing but love for this passionate，loving wife of his．He kissed her again and again，and held her hand．
　　‘I won't leave you！I'll protect you as well as I can，my dearest love，whatever you may or may not have done！’
　　They walked on，less turning her head occasionally to look at him．For her he was still perfection，despite his thinness and pale face．He was the one man who had loved her purely，and who believed in her as pure．Their arms around each other's waists，they walked through the woods on lonely footpaths，taking care not to meet anybody．They did not talk much，being content to be together at last．
　　‘Where shall we go？’asked Tess．
　　‘I don't know．Perhaps we could find a cottage to stay in tonight．Can you walk a long way，Tessy？’
　　‘Oh yes！I could walk for ever with your arm around me！’ At midday Angel went to a public house and brought food and wine back to where Tess was waiting in the woods for him．Her clothes were so fashionable that the country people would have noticed her．
　　‘I think we should keep walking inland，away from the coasts，said Clare，as they finished eating．‘We can hide there for a while．Later on，when they stop looking for us，we can go to a port and get right out of the country．’
　　But their plans were vague．They were like two children，who think only of the moment．The weather was warm and they enjoyed walking together．However，in the afternoon they did nut find any suitable cottages to stay in，and it was too cold to sleep outside．They had walked about fifteen miles，when they passed a large empty house in the middle of the woods．
　　‘All those rooms empty！’said Tess，‘and we have no shelter！’
　　‘We can stay the night there，’said Clare．‘Look，there's a window open．The caretaker probably airs the rooms in the daytime．We can climb in．Nobody will know．’
　　And so they did．They chose a bedroom with heavy old－fashioned furniture and a huge old bed．They kept quiet while the caretaker came to shut the windows in the evening．Then the house was theirs．They ate some of the food they had brought，and went to bed in total darkness．
　　During the night she told him about his sleepwalking just after their wedding．
　　‘You should have told me at the time！’
　　‘Don't think of the past！Think of the present．Tomorrow may mean the end of our happiness．’
　　But when tomorrow came it was wet and foggy．It seemed that the caretaker only came on fine days，so they were alone in the house．They had enough food and wine，and stayed there for the next five days．It was the honeymoon they had never had．They had no contact with people，and only noticed changes in the weather．Neither mentioned the depressing period from their wedding－day to the present．They lived for the moment，and were completely happy．When Angel suggested leaving their shelter and travelling to a port like Southampton or London，Tess was unwilling．
　　‘Why put an end to sweetness and happiness？Outside，everything is confused and sad．Here，we are quite content．
　　Angel agreed．Inside was forgiveness and love：outside was eventual punishment．
　　‘And…’she said，putting her cheek against his，‘I want you to go on loving me．I'm afraid you might reject me one day for what I've done．Then I would rather be dead．I must have been mad to kill him！But I don't want to be alive when you reject me for it．’
　　They stayed for one more day，but the caretaker came early that fine sunny morning．She wanted to open the windows in the bedrooms，which she did not usually do，and opened their bedroom door．She saw the young couple lying in the big bed，fast asleep，and hurried away to tell her neighbours．
　　Tess and Angel woke soon after，and decided to leave immediately．They dared not stay any longer．When they were in the woods Tess turned to look at the house．
　　‘So much happiness in that house！’she whispered．‘My life can only be a question of a few weeks．Why couldn't we have stayed there？’
　　‘Don't say that，Tess！We'll go northwards and get to a port．They won't find us．’
　　They kept going all day and most of the night，passing the cathedral city of Melchester and reaching open land．It was a windy，cloudy night．They walked on grass，so as not to make any noise on the road．They were alone and in darkness． Suddenly，Clare almost bumped into a great stone rising up in front of him．Moving forwards carefully，they found other stones，standing tall and black against the night sky．
　　‘What on earth is this place？’Clare asked．
　　‘Listen！’cried Tess．
　　The wind，playing on the huge stones，produced a strange tune，like the notes of a great harp．The couple walked slowly into the middle of the great circle of stones．
　　‘It's Stonehenge！’cried Clare．
　　‘The pagan temple？’
　　‘Yes．Older than the centuries；Older than the d'Urbervilles！’
　　‘Let's stay here tonight，Angel，’said Tess，lying down on a flat stone which was still warm from the day's sunshine．
　　‘We'd better not．This place can be seen for miles in daylight．’
　　‘I feel at home here，’murmured Tess．‘You used to say at Talbothays that I was a pagan，do you remember？’
　　He bent over her and kissed her．
　　‘Sleepy，are you，dearest？’
　　‘I love it here，’she said．‘I have been so happy with you．And here I have only the sky above my face．There is nobody in the world except us two．’
　　Clare thought she could rest a while here．He put his coat over her，and lay down beside her．
　　‘Angel，’she asked presently，as they listened to the wind among the stones，‘if anything happens to me，will you take care of Liza－Lu？’
　　‘I will．’
　　She is so good and pure．Oh Angel，I wish you would marry her if you lose me，as you will do soon ‘If I lose you，I lose everything．’
　　‘She has all the best of me without my bad side，and if she were yours，it would almost seem as if we were not separated by death．Well，I won't mention it again．’
　　There was silence for a while．Angel could see the first light in the east．They had not much time．
　　‘Did they sacrifice to God here？’she asked
　　‘No，to the sun．’
　　‘That reminds me，dear．Tell me，do you think we shall meet again after we are dead？I want to know．
　　He kissed her to avoid replying．
　　‘Oh Angel，that means no！’she almost sobbed．‘And I so wanted to see you again－so much，so much！Not even you and I，Angel，who love each other so much？’
　　He could not answer．Soon she fell asleep on the stone of sacrifice The night wind died away，and the stones looked black in the half－light．Something seemed to move in the distance．It was a figure approaching Stonehenge．Clare wished they had gone on，but it was too late．He turned，and saw another，and another．They were uniformed men，closing in on Tess with slow purposeful steps．Clare jumped up wildly，looking round for a way to escape．
　　‘It's no use，sir，’said the nearest policeman．‘We've surrounded the place．’
　　‘Let her finish her sleep！’he begged in a whisper，as the men gathered round the stone．He held her hand．She was breathing more like a trapped animal than a woman．All waited in the growing light，their faces and hands silver，the stones grey．When the light was strong，she awoke．
　　‘What is it，Angel？’she said，sitting up．‘Have they come for me？’
　　‘Yes，dearest，they have．’
　　‘That is right．I am almost glad．This happiness could not have lasted！’
　　She stood up and went towards the waiting men．‘I am ready，’she said quietly．
　　One July morning the sun shone on two figures climbing the hill leading out of the fine city of Wintoncester．They were young but they walked bent in sorrow．One was Angel Clare，the other Tess's younger sister，Liza－Lu．Hand in hand，with pale，tear－stained faces，they walked in silence．
　　When they reached the top of the hill，they heard the town clocks strike eight．They turned quickly and looked back at the city．They could see the cathedral，the college and the prison very clearly．A tall post was fixed to the prison tower．A few minutes after eight，as they watched，a black flag moved slowly up the post．
　　The gods had finished playing with Tess．Society had seen ‘justice’done．Her d'Urberville ancestors slept on in their tombs，uncaring．The two silent watchers dropped to the ground and stayed there without moving for a long time．The flag waved in the wind．As soon as they had strength，they stood up，joined hands again，and continued slowly on their way．



■ 20

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※



■ THE EMPE ROR'S NEW CLOTHES
　　Hans Christian Andersen
　　When two tailors tell the emperor they make magic cloth, he gives them gold thread to make the cloth for his new suit. The tailors are clever! They tell the emperor that stupid people can't see the cloth. And when the emperor wears his invisible suit in town, all the people laugh at him. The emperor is very embarrassed!
　　THE EMPEROR'S NEW CLOTHES
　　“I like clothes1! I love clothes!”says the emperor. “I have clothes for the morning, for the afternoon and for the evening! I have clothes in different colours!”
　　One day, two men come to town.
　　“We are tailors1,”says the first man.
　　“We make cloth2,”says the second man.
　　“Our cloth is magic!”
　　The emperor is very happy. He wants some new cloth to make a suit1.
　　He wants a new suit for the parade2 in town.
　　“Why is your cloth magic
”the emperor asks the tailors.
　　“It's magic because clever1 people can see it. Stupid2 people can't.”
　　The emperor is very pleased.
　　“We need gold thread1 to make the magic cloth,”the men say.
　　The emperor gives the tailors lots of gold thread. But the tailors steal2 the gold.
　　The tailors start to make the magic cloth. They sit at the empty1 loom2 and work all day and all night.
　　Clickerty, click, clickerty, click, goes the loom.
　　“Go and see the cloth,”says the emperor to the prime minister.
　　The prime minister looks1 and looks.
　　But he can't see the cloth!
　　“I'm not stupid!”he thinks2.
　　“The cloth is beautiful,”says the prime minister and goes to tell the emperor. The wicked1 tailors laugh2 and laugh and laugh!
　　“Give us1 some more gold thread,”the tailors say.
　　The emperor gives them2 more gold thread.
　　The wicked tailors steal all the gold!
　　The emperor sends a general1 to see the cloth.
　　The general looks and looks and looks, but he can't see the cloth.
　　“The prime minister can see the cloth,”thinks the general, “I'm not stupid!”
　　“The cloth is wonderful,”he says. When the general goes away1, the tailors laugh and laugh and laugh!
　　The tailors cut1 and sew2 the cloth.
　　“Can the emperor come and try on his new clothes
”the men ask.
　　“Of course, of course,”says the emperor. Let's go!”
　　“Oh dear,”thinks the emperor. “I can't see the cloth! The prime minister can see it. The general can see it! I'm NOT stupid!”
　　The emperor touches1 the invisible2 cloth. “It's a beautiful suit!”he says.
　　“The cloth is cool1 and very light2. It's perfect for the summer!”he says.
　　The emperor wears the invisible suit at the parade.
　　“He's got no clothes on!”shouts a little boy. “Ha, ha, ha,”laugh the people.
　　The emperor's face1 is very red. “It's a trick2!”he thinks. “Look for the tailors!”shouts the emperor. But of course, the soldiers can't find the tailors…or the gold thread!






　　HANSEL AND GRETEL
　　Jakob and Wilhelm Grimm
　　Hansel and Gretel's family is very poor. The children don't have enough food. Their father decides to lose them in the forest. The two children find a house made of sweets and cakes! But an old witch, who loves in the house, captures them. She wants to eat Hansel! The children find gold in the house and escape. Home again with their mummy and daddy, they are happy and …rich!
　　HANSEL AND GRETEL
　　Hansel and Gretel's daddy is a woodcutter1.
　　Their mummy is a housewife.
　　They live in a small house in the forest.
　　The family is very poor and the children are often hungry2.
　　“We have no food1 for the children,”cries2 the woodcutter's wife. “And no money3,”continues the woodcutter, “but I have a plan. When I go to work tomorrow, I can leave Hansel and Gretel in the forest.”“SHUSH,”whispers his wife, “the children mustn't hear you.”
　　But Hansel isn't asleep1 and he hears his father's plan. The boy puts small stones2 in pockets.
　　Next day when they go into the forest, Hansel drops3 the stones behind him.
　　The woodcutter leaves the children in the forest and goes home.
　　“One, two, three,”count1 Hansel and Gretel.
　　They collect2 the stones and soon they are home.
　　The next day the woodcutter takes the children a long, long way into the forest.
　　The children have a bread roll1. Hansel drops breadcrumbs2 behind him.
　　When the woodcutter leaves the children, Gretel is afraid of the animals3.
　　“Don't be afraid,”says Hansel,“we can follow the breadcrumbs to get home.”But the birds eat the breadcrumbs and Hansel and Gretel can't find their way home.
　　Soon it is dark1 and they are lost!
　　“I'm very tired1,”says Gretel.
　　“Let's rest under this tree2,”Hansel suggests.
　　The two children go to sleep and when they wake up they are very, very hungry!
　　“Look,”shouts Gretel, “a house of cakes1!”
　　“Mmmmm, a biscuit roof, sugar windows and cream cakes on the door! Yummy yummy2!”says Hansel, “let's…eat the house!”
　　Hansel eats a biscuit and Gretel eats a cake. They hear a voice inside the house.
　　“Nibble1, nibble like a mouse2, who is nibbling at my house
”says the vioce.
　　“It's a cat,”the children answer.
　　The door opens and an ugly1 old woman with a stick2 comes out. Hansel and Gretel are afraid, but the old woman smiles and says, “Come in, come in, come into my house, my dear children!”
　　The house is full of good food to eat and warm beds1. Hansel and Gretel don't know the old woman is a bad witch2. The witch doesn't like cakes or sugar to eat, she likes…children!
　　The witch captures1 the children. She wants Gretel to help her in the house and she puts Hansel in a cage2.
　　“Ha, ha, ha,”laughs the witch. “Eat all the food, I want a nice FAT3 boy to eat!”
　　“Are you fat now
”asks the witch.
　　“Give me your finger1, I can't see very well.”
　　But Hansel puts a small bone2 out of the cage.
　　“My goodness,”cries the witch, “you are very thin!”
　　“Light1 the fire2 in the oven3,”the witch tells Gretel. “I can't,”the little girl answers. “Stupid goose4,”shouts the witch and puts her head in the oven to light the fire.
　　Gretel pushes1 the witch into the oven and frees2 Hansel.
　　The children find gold and jewels in the witch's house and take them to their mummy and daddy. The woodcutter's family is never hungry again. They are happy3 now.






　　THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTER-DAME
　　Victor Hugo
　　Quasimodo the hunchback lives in the bell tower at Notre-Dame, in Paris. He only has one friend, Esmeralda.
　　One day, a curious little boy called Pierre goes up the tower to see “the monster” everyone is afraid of.
　　Quasimodo shows Pierre the birds he cures and little Pierre help him. The two boys soon become friends…
　　THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTER-DAME
　　Quasimodo lives in the bell tower1 of Notre-Dame. Notre-Dame is a big cathedral in Paris. Every day he rings2 the old bells. DING, DONG, DING, DONG. And all the people go to church.
　　“Who rings the bells
” little Pierre asks his mummy.
　　“Ohhh, a horrible monster!” she answers. “Don't go up1 the bell tower! The monster eats2 little boys!”
　　Little Pierre is curious. One day, after mass, he creeps1 up the steps to the bell tower.
　　“Hello…are you here, monster
” he calls. “I'm not afraid of you,” he says.
　　“Come out and let me see you!”
　　“I'm not a monster,” a voice says.Pierre sees a teenager. A very ugly1 boy!“Who are you
 How old are you
” asks Pierre.
　　“My name's Quasimodo,” the ugly boy answers. “I'm fifteen years old.”
　　Quasimodo is a hunchback1. He's short and bent2. One eye is big and one eye is small. He's got a big nose and brown hair.“You're not very good-looking,” says Pierre.
　　“I know, I know,” Quasimodo answers.
　　“Where do you live
” Pierre asks.“I live here in the tower,” Quasimodo answers. “I work here, sleep1 here and eat here too. Where do you live
”
　　“I live at the king's palace. My father's a gardener2 there.”
　　“Do you go to school
” asks Pierre.
　　“No, no, I can't leave1 the tower, ”the hunchback answers. “Everyone is afraid of me…except Esmeralda.”
　　“What do you do all day
”asks Pierre.
　　“Oh, I'm always very busy,” Quasimodo answers. “I ring the bells, and look after2 the birds3 …come and see!”
　　Quasimodo takes Pierre up to the top1 of the tower. There are boxes of leaves2. In the boxes are … birds! There are sparrows with broken3 wings and pigeons with broken legs. There's a robin with a bad cough4 too!
　　“This is a real hospital!” exclaims Pierre. When the birds see the hunchback, they chirp1 and limp2 to him. They are very happy when Quasimodo is there with them!
　　“You are a doctor …an animal doctor. A vet1! You are brilliant, good and kind! You can look after all the birds in Paris!” shouts2 Piere. Quasimodo blushes3.
　　“Thank you, thank you,” he says. “But I can't leave the tower!”
　　Quasimodo is sad when Pierre goes home. “Come and see me again,” he calls. Pierre nods1 and waves2 his hand,.“Tomorrow is Sunday. I can come after mass,” He answers. “See you then.”
　　Every day Pierre runs to visit the hunchback.
　　Quasimodo is very, very happy because he has a friend. Pierre is his first friend!
　　Pierre is happy too. He likes to help nurse1 the birds.
　　The king of France is depressed1!
　　“My parrot2 doesn't talk3!”he cries. “I say: ‘repeat after me: my darling!, my king’. But the stupid bird is MUTE4!”
　　“Take it to the hunchback of Notre-Dame, ”says Pierre. Quasimodo is very surprised1 to see the king in the bell tower. He takes the parrot and speaks to it quietly.
　　“Pretty boy, pretty boy, my darling,”answers the parrot.
　　The king is very happy. “I name1 you the royal vet!” he says. Quasimodo rides2 to the Palace every day now, but he still lives in the bell tower where he rings the bells and looks after his little friends…the birds!




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※






■ KING KONG
　　King Kong is a big black gorilla that lives in the African jungle. It terrifies the natives. Professor Merrywell and Peggy Queen capture the gorilla and take it to New York. King Kong escapes from its cage and climbs the Empire State Building. Aeroplanes attack and shoot the gorilla. When it dies, Peggy is very sad.



■ KING KONG
　　Professor Merrywell and Peggy Queen are in the African Jungle. It's very, very hot and the mosquitoes1 are terrible!
　　"Ouch," she says, "these mosquitoes are very hungry!"
　　"I'm hungry2 too," says the professor.
　　"What's this
" asks Professor Merrywell.
　　"It's cucumber sandwich1," Peggy answers, "and that's a ham roll2."
　　TUM, TATUM, TUM, TATUM.
　　"What's that
" asks professor Merrywell. "It's a drum," Peggy answers. "And that's a native. HELP!"
　　"One, two, six, eight natives," counts1 Peggy. "They are hungry too," says Professor Merrywell.
　　"Have a cucumber sandwich," says Peggy.
　　"I don't like cucumber," the native answers. "I like…YOU!"
　　"Oh no," says Peggy, "CANNIBALS2!"
　　The natives tie1 Peggy to a tree. "Don't go," shouts Peggy.
　　"You are the King's dinner," says a native.
　　"Every year he eats a girl from the village. This year he can eat2 an American!"
　　Peggy is afraid1. She can hear2 bees3 and animals in the jungle. "Elephants, tigers, monkeys ,lions," she thinks, "and that's a…GORILLA!HELLLLP!"
　　In front of Peggy is King Kong!
　　King Kong is an enormous1, black gorilla with big hands and big feet. "AHHHHH," cries Peggy.
　　The big gorilla looks at Peggy. The native girls have got brown faces, brown hair and brown eyes. This girl has got blue eyes and yellow hair!
　　King Kong touches1 her face and hair.
　　"Don't eat me, you big stupid gorilla!" she shouts.
　　King Kong likes this girl, she is different! The gorilla takes her to its home in the trees2.
　　King Kong brings bananas to Peggy.
　　"Bananas, bananas, bananas," complains Peggy. "Haven't you got any ice-cream1 or chocolate
"
　　One day, when King Kong is in the jungle, Professor Merrywell rescues2 Peggy.
　　"King Kong must go to New York," says Professor Merrywell. Hundreds of natives help the Professor. They make the gorilla a prisoner1, and put it on a ship2.
　　Men ,women and children go to see the gorilla. They take photgraphs of the gorilla. The flashes1 make King Kong very angry. He roars2 and breaks the cage3.
　　The police can't stop King Kong! The gorilla charges1 down the streets. The people are terrified2! "Come on Peggy, " says Professor Merrywell, "let's go to my office in the Empire State Building!"
　　King Kong wants Peggy! The gorilla roars down the streets1. It looks at all the blonde women. He doesn't like the lights2 or the traffic3. It's very different to the jungle. There aren't any banana trees!
　　King Kong arrives at the Empire State Building. The big gorilla starts to climb1 up the building. Up, up, up, it goes. It looks for2 Peggy in every window.
　　King Kong sees Peggy and climbs to the top1 of the Empire State Building. Helicopters attack from the left and the right. BANG, BANG, BANG, they shoot2 the gorilla.
　　Peggy is very sad1. "I'm sorry," she cries, "the jungle is your home, not New York."
　　The giant gorilla touches Peggy's face and her beautiful yellow hair, then falls2 off the Empire State Building.









■ OSWALD THE OCTOPUS
　　Oswald the Octopus lives in the sea near Spain. Oswald likes to dance but it makes a lot of noise and the fish are afraid. When the fishermen can't find fish in the sea, they tell the mayor. The mayor calls an expert. The expert soon finds a way to stop Oswald making a noise!



■ OSWALD THE OCTOPUS
　　San Belcredas is a small village in the south1 of Spain. It's a pretty village on the coast2. The sea3 is blue and very clean. The houses are pink, blue, yellow, green and white.
　　At half-past-eleven in the evening, the men go fishing1. They put nets2 and baskets3 in the small fishing boats. There are always a lot of fish in the sea!
　　The men arrive in the morning with the boats chock-a-block1 with fish! There are big fish, small fish, pretty fish, ugly fish and shell fish2. The village women sell the fish in the market.
　　One morning, when the fishing boats arrive at the port1, the men are very glum2! "There are no fish in the sea," they say. "No fish!" echo the women. "But that's impossible! There are always fish in the sea."
　　"We've got shoes, boxes and some bottles…but no fish!" they answer.
　　The village people are desperate! "Let's go to the mayor1," they say. The mayor is worried2 too. He loves Spanish paella.
　　"I can't eat paella if there aren't any fish," he thinks. "I have an idea1," he says. "There is a man in the next town. He is an expert2 on life in the sea."
　　The mayor telephones Pablo Cordobez, the expert!
　　That evening Pablo arrives at the port in a mini submarine1.
　　The mayor gets in2 and they go out to the sea.
　　"The fishermen are right," says Pablo, "there are no fish!"
　　The two men investigate1 the sea bed2. "Listen!" says Pablo. They can hear a loud noise3!
　　"CLICKITY, CLICK, CLICKITY, CLICK."
　　"Look, look," laughs Pablo. "That is why there are no fish." The mayor looks out of the porthole1. He rubs2 his eyes and looks again.
　　The men start to laugh3.
　　In front of them is Oswald the octopus! It's got a castanet1 in each tentacle2, and it's dancing! It sees the submarine.
　　"CLICKITY, CLICK,CLICKITY, CLICK! "It goes round and round the submarine.
　　"The fish are afraid1 of the noise," says Pablo. "One, two, three, four, five, six, seven and eight, " he counts the castanets. "Sorry, Oswald, you can't play2 the castanets, here."
　　That evening the men go fishing. The women are at the port when they arrive. "Where are the fish to sell1 in the market2
" they ask.
　　"There are no fish," the fishermen say.
　　That night Pablo and the mayor get in the submarine and go back to the deep1 sea.
　　"CLINKITY, CLINK, CLINKITY, CLINK," they hear. "Oh no," says the mayor. "Look at Oswald!"
　　Osw ld has got some shells in its tentacles, and it's dancing again!
　　CLINKITY, CLINK, CLINKITY, CLINK. Pablo takes the shells from Oswald! But Oswald starts to snap1 its tentacles!
　　SNAPPITY, SNAP, SNAPPITY, SNAP."
　　"I have an idea," says Pablo. He tells the women to knit1 gloves2. Pablo puts the gloves on Oswald's tentacles. "Now you can dance," he says, "and the fishermen can fish." "And I can have my PAELLA!" says the mayor.









■ Elzie Chrisler Segar
　　POPEYE THE SAILOR
　　Popeye goes cycling in the country. He sees a big turkey on a gate. It's a very special turkey! Popeye thinks it can make him a rich man. He leaves the bird with his friend Olive Oyl but Olive doesn't know the turkey is special…and she's hungry!



■ POPEYE THE SAILOR
　　It's Christmas day and Popeye is at home.“What a beautiful morning;”he thinks, “the perfect day for cycling1.”
　　He takes his bike out of the garage2 and leaves for the country3.
　　Popeye is cycling down the road when he sees a big turkey1 sitting on a gate2. It' s singing3!It's got a beautiful voice!“I'm Tommy the Turkey,” sings the turkey.
　　Popeye tries to grab1 the turkey but the bird jumps off 2 the gate.“Here you are, birdie,”says Popeye,“here's some popcorn for you.”
　　“I sit in a tree,”sings the turkey, and runs to a pond1.
　　Popeye goes to jump on the turkey, but the bird jumps to the left 2 and Popeye falls3 in the pond. SPLASH!!!
　　The turkey runs in a field1 and Popeye chases it. In the field is a big bull 2 .
　　The bull sees Popeye and throws3 him up in the air. Popeye crashes in a haystack4.
　　“I sing every day,”sings the turkey, and sits in an oak tree.
　　Popeye starts to climb1 the tree. The bird fills its beak 2 with acorns 3 and shoots 4 him. RATTATAT-A-TAT go the acorns.
　　Next, the turkey climbs on a boulder 1 and sings: “For you and for me!”
　　Poor Popeye is very, very tired 2 now, but he wants the turkey!
　　Popeye takes a tin of spinach1 out of his pocket and eats it! “GULP,GULP, GULP.”
　　Popeye's muscles 2 are enormous! He is very strong! “You can't escape 3 me now,”he shouts.
　　Popeye pushes and pushes 1 the boulder, and it rolls 2 down the hill. The turkey tries to run on the boulder but falls off. Popeye quickly picks it up 3 and goes home.
　　Once home, Popeye switches on1 the television. Mr Rocketfeller , the famous banker 2, is speaking.“I can't find my singing turkey,”he says.“There is a $50.000 reward 3 for the person who finds it.”
　　“Wow,”shouts Popeye jumping up.“I'm rich 1 !”
　　Popeye telephones Mr Rocketfeller, but the phone is out of order 2 . Popeye decides to take the turkey to Olive Oyl's house.
　　Popeye knocks 1 on the door. Olive Oyl isn't at home, so he ties the turkey to the door-knocker 2 and writes Olive a message 3 . Then he goes to a telephone box 4 .
　　Mutton, Olive's bulldog 1 , goes and sits in front of the turkey.“Bow, wow,”barks 2 the dog.
　　“Tommy, bow, Turkey, wow,” replies the turkey. Mutton is puzzled 3 ! The dog eats the message and goes back to its kennel 4 .
　　Olive Oyl arrives home and sees the bird.“What a huge 1 turkey,”she says.“It's a Christmas present from Popeye.”
　　She takes the bird in the house.
　　“Merry Christmas, Olive,”says Popeye when he arrives.
　　“Merry Christmas,”Olive answers,“thank you for my present.”“What present
”Popeye asks.
　　“The turkey, of course,”answers Olive.“Please, have dinner with us,”she says.
　　On the table1 is the singing turkey…
　　ROASTED2!









■ Lewis Carroll
　　THE TWEEDLETWINS
　　Alice is lost in a wood. She meets two very strange twins, Tweedledee and Tweedledum. The twins are exactly the same and they argue all the time! Alice asks them the way out of the wood but the twins are frightened by a crow and run away leaving Alice alone!



■ THE TWEEDLE TWINS
　　Alice is in a wood 1.“Do I go left or right
”she says.
　　She sees two men.“Excuse me, I'm lost 2.Can you tell me the way out of this wood
”she asks. The two men do not answer. “They're statues 3 ,”says Alice.
　　“We aren't statues,” the men say.
　　“My name's Alice. Who are you
”the girl asks.
　　“I'm Tweedledee, and this is my brother Tweedledum.”
　　“We're twins 1,”says Tweedledum, “we are exactly the same, and we wear the same clothes 2.”
　　Tweedledee and Tweedledum wear shirts with collars, ties and trousers. They wear cardigans, socks and shoes. They've got school caps on their heads 1 too.
　　“Do you like your brother
”Alice asks.
　　“No, we argue 2 every day,”Tweedledee answers.
　　“What do you argue about
”asks Alice.
　　“We argue about stories.”
　　“What stories
”asks Alice.
　　“The story today is about the carpenter 1 and the walrus 2,”the twins answer.
　　“I like the carpenter,”says Tweedledum.
　　“I like the walrus,”says Tweedledee.
　　“Is it important who you like
”asks Alice.“It's only a story!”
　　“Of course it's important,”the twins answer.
　　“Do you want to listen to 1 the story
”
　　“No, no,”says Alice.“I don't want to listen to the story. Please tell me the way out of the wood.”
　　“After the story,”say the twins.
　　The twins tell Alice this story.
　　The carpenter and the walrus are on the beach 1 one day. It's a beautiful day.
　　“Let's go for a walk,”says the carpenter to the oysters 2 in the sea.
　　“Oh, please say yes,”the baby oysters say to their daddy.
　　The oysters polish 1 their shoes and wash 2 their hands. They like a walk on the beach. The carpenter and the walrus walk in front and the oysters run behind. The baby oysters are very happy.
　　“Let's sit and rest 1,”says the carpenter.“I am hungry,”says the walrus,“what can we eat
”he asks.“Not us,”say the oysters trembling 2 in their shoes.
　　“Of course not,”the carpenter answers,“you are our friends.”
　　The walrus and the carpenter have a loaf of bread 1 and some butter 2.
　　“It's a pity we can't make sandwiches,”says the walrus.“Bread and butter isn't very interesting.”
　　The two friends talk and eat, and eat and talk.
　　“It's time to go home,”says the carpenter.
　　“Where are our friends the oysters
”asks the walrus.
　　But there are no oysters on the beach…only oyster shells 1 !
　　“Oh dear,”says the carpenter.“Our friends are in our tummies 2!”
　　“I don't like this story,”says Alice.
　　“Those poor oysters! The walrus and the carpenter aren't very nice 1 !They ask the oysters to go for a walk, and then they eat them!”
　　“But fresh 2 oysters are very nice,”say the twins.
　　“It's time for our battle 1,” the twins tell Alice.
　　“Please tell me the way out of the wood,”says Alice for the sixth time.
　　“You must help us prepare for the battle,”say the terrible twins.
　　“But why must you fight
”asks Alice.
　　“We fight every day,”Tweedledum answers.
　　“Today the battle is about a rattle 1,”Tweedledum continues.
　　“A RATTLE!”cries Alice in surprise 2.
　　“He always breaks 3 my rattles,”Tweedledum says pointing at his brother.
　　“It's an old rattle,”Tweedledee answers.
　　“No it isn't,”says Tweedledum.
　　“Yes, it is,”Tweedledee replies.
　　“No, it isn't!”
　　“Yes, it is!”
　　“No, it isn't!”
　　“Yes, it is!”
　　“OH, SHUT UP,”shouts Alice.“Have your battle!”
　　Alice helps the twins to prepare for their battle. They put saucepans 1 on their heads and pillows 2 on their tummies.
　　Tweedledee has a sword 1 and Tweedledum has an umbrella.
　　“We are very brave 2 to fight battles,”the twins say to Alice. WHOOSH! A big black crow 3 flies down on the twins.“Help, help,”they cry and run into the woods. Alice is alone again.
　　“The Tweedle Twins are VERY brave,”says Alice.“And I am VERY LOST!”









■ FLIGGY THE WITCH
　　Fliggy has got a granny. Her name is Dill Dee. Dilly Dee is a very important witch. She's got fifty medals for good spell1 and fifteen for bad spells. She's got an Oscar too!
　　Dilly Dee lives in Scotland. She wears a long black cloak1 and a pointed black hat. She goes shopping on a broomstick2 and she's got a black cat. Its name is Speedy Sam. It's a very fast cat. It's intelligent too!
　　Fliggy lives in a flat1 in Birmingham. Fliggy is a very modern witch, she's got a magic mobile phone2 !She wears red and yellow blouses and blue and green trousers. She hates black!
　　Fliggy goes shopping on an electric broom1! She's got a cat. It isn't intelligent. It's white and very stupid! Its name is Sleepy Sal.
　　Fliggy wants to be famous but she isn't a very good witch. She's a disaster! When she goes out on her electric broom, she crashes into chimneys1 and television aerials2!
　　Fliggy opens the window. “Oh dear, it's raining cats and dogs!”she says. Sleepy Sal is puzzled1.“Not REAL cats and dogs, silly.”explains Fliggy. “Cats and dogs means a lot of rain.”
　　Now, where is my umbrella
 It isn't on the table, it isn't behind the armchair1, and it isn't under the sofa2.Fliggy speaks in her magic mobile phone.“IFFY, PIFFY, POFFY, FEE, bring my umbrella here to me! ”
　　There is no umbrella, but there are cats and dogs falling1 from the sky. “The spell is wrong2!”cries Fliggy. “IFFY , PIFFY, POFFY, FEE,”she says again, “bring my umbrella here to me…PLEASE!”
　　“Oh, here is my umbrella,”she says, “and there are no cats and dogs!”Fliggy puts up1 her umbrella, jumps on her electric broom and races2 out of the window.
　　“Good morning, Mrs Rose, ”says Fliggy. “How are you
”“Oh, I'm not very well1 today,”Mrs Rose answers. “I'm an old lady.” “How old are you
”asks Fliggy. “I'm 92 years old!”the old lady answers.
　　“Can you make me twenty-one
”asks Mrs Rose. “Yes, of course, ”Fliggy answers. She speaks in her magic mobile phone and says, “IFFY, PIFFY, POFFY, TON, Mrs Rose is…A…A…ATCHOOO…ONE！”Fliggy sneezes1!
　　Fliggy opens her eyes. “Oh no!”cries Fliggy. In the supermarket trolley1 is Mrs Rose. She isn't twenty-one…she's a baby! She's one year old…! Mrs Rose is furious2!
　　Fliggy goes for a walk in the park.
　　“Help, help, ”shouts Patty Peel.
　　“My brother Teddy is in the lake1 and he can't swim2!”
　　“IFFY, PIFFY, POFFY, LOG,”says Fliggy, “make Teddy Peel a little frog1!”“Please make Teddy a boy,”says Patty.“Mummy doesn't like frogs!”“Mummy doesn't like frogs!”“IFFY, PIFFY, POFFY, LOG, Teddy Peel is NOT a frog,”repeats Fliggy.
　　“WOOF,WOOF,”says a little dog. “Mummy doesn't like frogs…OR dogs!”shouts Patty Peel. Fliggy jumps on her electric broom and goes home. “Perhaps I can win1 an Oscar tomorrow,”she says sadly.









■ FLIGGY GOES TO LONDON
　　Sleepy Sal is Fliggy the witch's friend. It is a fat, white cat. Sleepy Sal is a very active cat. It likes to eat1 and sleep2. “Wake up3, Sleepy Sal,”says Fliggy. “It's eight o'clock!”
　　“Go away,”thinks1 Sleepy Sal, “I don't want to wake up!” “Today is the 31st of October,”continues Fliggy. “There is a big party in London today, It's Halloween2!”
　　“Every Halloween, the President Witch awards1 an Oscar. I want to be MISS WITCH 1995! I want to be rich!”Fliggy shakes2 Sleepy Sal , “I must make a fantastic good spell3 today.”
　　Fliggy and Sleepy Sal zoom1 out of the window, on Fliggy's electric broom. Sleepy Sal sees the houses and the people. “MIAOW,”it says. Sleepy Sal doesn't like flying2!
　　Fliggy passes a brown duck. “Good morning,”says the duck. “I've got to fly to Africa. It's cold for me here, but I'm very, very tired1.”
　　“I can help you,”says Fliggy.
　　Fliggy takes her magic mobile phone and says, “IFFY, PIFFY, POFFY, OON. Give the duck a big balloon1!”The duck has got a big balloon on its back! “Oh thank you, ”says the duck. “Now I can rest2.”
　　Sleepy Sal watches the wind1 blow the balloon…north! “Miaow. Africa is south, Fliggy,”it says. “The bird doesn't like snow2 and ice3, Fliggy. FLIGGY…FLIGGY!”it miaows. But Fliggy doesn't hear.
　　Fliggy and Sleepy Sal fly1 over Trafalgar Square. “Look, ”says Fliggy, “Look at that poor man. He is on that column and can't get down2.”
　　Fliggy takes her magic mobile phone and says, “IFFY, PIFFY, POFFY, POUND. Put that man on the ground1!”The famous statue2 of Admiral Lord Nelson is in the fountain3!
　　“How terrible,”says Fliggy. “This is Piccadilly Circus,”but…there are no animals! “Fliggy takes her magic mobile phone and says,”IFFY, PIFFY, POFFY, POWNS. Fill1 this circus with animals and clowns!”
　　Tigers and lions chase1 the people in the streets. “HELP, HELP,”they shout. Monkeys2 and clowns swing3 on the statue of Eros and break it. “Now, that is a real circus, ”says Fliggy.
　　“Oh, look, Sleepy Sal,”says Fliggy. “Look at the bridge…it's broken1!”Fliggy speaks in her magic mobile phone: Tower Bridge closes and men can't open2 it !
　　Fliggy casts a lot of spells. At five o'clock in the afternoon, London is in ruins1! “Now I want to see the Tower,”she tells Sleepy Sal. When Fliggy arrives at the Tower it is dark2.
　　She sees two men with big sacks1.“It's dark, those poor men can't see,”says Fliggy. “IFFY, PIFFY, POFFY, PIGHT, give those men a nice bright light2!”The police see the men, and stop them. In the sacks are the CROWN JEWELS3!
　　Fliggy arrives at the Halloween party. The President Witch calls her, “Fliggy, you are a very clever1 witch,”she says. The President Witch gives Fliggy the witch's Oscar. A golden pumpkin2!




※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※



■ The Elves and the Shoemaker
　　There was once a shoemaker, who, through no fault of his own, became so poor that at last he had nothing left but just enough leather to make one pair of shoes. He cut out the shoes at night, so as to set to work upon them next morning; and as he had a good conscience, he laid himself quietly down in his bed, committed himself to heaven, and fell asleep. In the morning, after he had said his prayers, and was going to get to work, he found the pair of shoes made and finished, and standing on his table. He was very much astonished, and could not tell what to think, and he took the shoes in his hand to examine them more nearly; and they were so well made that every stitch was in its right place, just as if they had come from the hand of a master-workman.
　　Soon after, a purchaser entered, and as the shoes fitted him very well, he gave more than the usual price for them, so that the shoemaker had enough money to buy leather for two more pairs of shoes.
　　He cut them at night, and intended to set to work the next morning with fresh spirit; when he got up they were already finished, and a customer even was not lacking, who gave him so much money that he was able to buy leather enough for four new pairs. Early next morning he found the four pairs also finished, and so it always happened; whatever he cut out in the evening was worked up by the morning, so that he was soon in the way of making a gook living, and in the end became very well to do.
　　One night, not long before Christmas, when the shoemaker had finished cutting out, and before he went to bed, he said to his wife,
　　“How would it be if we were to sit up tonight and see who it is that does us this service
”
　　His wife agreed, and set a light to burn. Then they both hid in a corner of the room, behind some coats that were hanging up, and then they began to watch. As soon as it was midnight they saw come in two neatly-formed naked little men, who seated themselves before the shoemaker's table, and took up the work that was already prepared, and began to stitch, to pierce, and to hammer so cleverly and quickly with their little fingers that the shoemaker's eyes could scarcely follow them, so full of wonder was he. And they never left off until everything was finished and was standing ready on the table, and then they jumped up and ran off.
　　The next morning the shoemaker's wife said to her husband, “Those little men have made us rich, and we ought to show ourselves grateful. With all their running about, and having nothing to cover them, they must be cold. I'll tell you what: I will make little shirts, coats, waistcoats, and breeches for them, and knit each of them a pair of stockings, and you shall make each of them a pair of shoes. ”
　　The husband consented willingly, and at night, when everything was finished, they laid the gifts together on the table, instead of the cut-out work, and placed themselves so that they could observe how the little men would behave. When midnight came, they rushed in, ready to set work, but when they found, instead of the pieces of prepared leather, the neat little garments put ready forthem, they stood a moment in surprise, and then they testified the greatest delight. With the greatest swiftness they took up the pretty garments and slipped them on, singing,
　　“What spruce and dandy boys are we!
　　No longer cobblers we will be. ”
　　Then they hopped and danced about, jumping over the chairs and tables, and at last danced out at the door.
　　From that time they were never seen again; but it always went well with the shoemaker as long as he lived, and whatever he took in hand prospered.






■ The Wolf and the Seven Little Goats
　　There was once an old goat who had seven little ones, and was as fond of them as ever mother was of her children. One day she had to go into the wood to fetch food for them, so she called them all round her.
　　“Dear children, ”said she,“I am going out into the wood; and while I am gone, be on your guard against the wolf, for when he were once to get inside he would eat you up, skin, bones, and all. The wretch often disguises himself, but he may always be known by his hoarse voice and black paws. ”
　　“Dear mother, ”answered the kids, “you need not be afraid, we will take good care of ourselves.” And the mother bleated good-bye, and went on her way with an easy mind.
　　It was not long before someone came knocking at the house door, and crying out,
　　“Open the door, my dear children, your mother has come back, and has brought each of you something. ”
　　But the little kids knew it was the wolf by the hoarse voice.
　　“We will not open the door,” cried they; “you are not our mother; she has a delicate and sweet voice, and your voice is hoarse; you must be the wolf. ”
　　Then off went the wolf to a shop and bought a big lump of chalk, and ate it up to make his voice soft. And then he came back, knocked at the house door, and cried,
　　“Open the door, my dear children, your mother is here, and has brought each of you something. ”
　　But the wolf had put up his black paws against the window, and the kids, seeing this, cried out,
　　“We will not open the door; our mother has no black paws like you; you must be the wolf. ”
　　The wolf then ran to a baker.
　　“Baker, ”said he, “I am hurt in the foot; pray spread some dough over the place. ”
　　And when the baker had plastered his feet, he ran to the miller.
　　“Miller,”said he, “strew me some white meal over my paws. ”But the miller refused, thinking the wolf must be meaning harm to someone.
　　“If you don't do it,” cried the wolf, “I'll eat you up!”
　　And the miller was afraid and did as he was told. And that just shows what men are.
　　And now came the rogue the third time to the door and knocked. “Open, children!”cried he. “Your dear mother has come home, and brought you each something from the wood. ”
　　“First show us your paws,” said the kids, “so that we may know if you are really our mother or not. ”
　　And he put up his paws against the window, and when they saw that they were white, all seemed right, and they opened the door; and when he was inside they saw it was the wolf, and they were terrified and tried to hide themselves. One ran under the table, the second got into the bed, the third into the oven, the fourth ran into the kitchen, the fifth hid in the cupboard, the sixth under the sink, the seventh in the clock-case. But the wolf found them all, and gave them short shrift; one after the other he swallowed down, all but the youngest, who was hid in the clock-case. And so the wolf, having got what he wanted, strolled forth into the green meadows, and laying himself down under a tree, he fell asleep.
　　Not long after, the mother goat came back from the wood; and, oh! what a sight met her eyes! The door was standing wide open; table, chairs, and stools, all thrown about; dishes broken; quilt and pillows torn off the bed. She sought her children; they were nowhere to be found. She called to each of them by name, but nobody answered, until she came to the name of the youngest.
　　“Here I am, Mother,” a little voice cried,“ here, in the clock-case. ”
　　And so she helped him out, and heard how the wolf had come, and eaten all the rest. And you may think how she cried for the loss of her dear children. At last in her grief she wandered out of doors, and the youngest kid with her; and when they came into the meadow, there they saw the wolf lying under a tree, and snoring so that the branches shook. The mother goat looked at him carefully on all sides and she noticed how something inside his body was moving and struggling.
　　“Dear me!” thought she. “Can it be that my poor children that he devoured for his evening meal are still alive
” And she sent the little kid back to the house for a pair of shears, and needle, and thread. Then she cut the wolf's body open, and no sooner had she made one snip than out came the head of one of the kids; and then another snip, and then one after the other the six little kids all jumped out alive and well, for in his greediness the rogue had swallowed them down whole. How delightful this was! So they comforted their dear mother and hopped about like tailors at a wedding.
　　“Now fetch some good hard stones,” said the mother, “and we will fill his body with them, as he lies asleep. ”
　　And so they fetched some in all haste, and put them inside him, and the mother sewed him up so quickly again that he was none the wiser.
　　When the wolf at last awoke, and got up, the stones inside him made him feel very thirsty, and as he was going to the brook to drink, they struck and rattled one against another. And so he cried out:
　　What is this I feel inside me
　　Knocking hard against my bones

　　How should such a thing betide me!
　　They were kids, and now they're stones.
　　So he came to the brook, and stooped to drink, but the heavy stones weighed him down, so he fell over into the water and was drowned. And when the seven little kids saw it they came up running.
　　“The wolf is dead, the wolf is dead! ” they cried, and taking hands, they danced with their mother all about the place.
　　hide [baid] (hid [hid], hidden ['hidn])vt.






■ The Frog Prince
　　In the old times, when peo ple could have all they wished, there lived a King whose daughters were all handsome, but the youngest was so beautiful that the sun himself, who has seen so much, wondered each time he shone over her because of her beauty. Near the royal castle there was a great dark wood, and in the wood under an old linden tree was a well; and when the day was hot, the King's daughter used to go forth into the wood and sit by the brink of the cool well, and if the time seemed long, she would take out a golden ball, and throw it up and catch it again, and this was her favorite pastime.
　　Now it happened one day that the golden ball, instead of falling back into the maiden's little hand which had sent it aloft, dropped to the ground near the edge of the well and rolled in. The King's daughter followed it with her eyes as it sank, but the well was deep, so deep that the bottom could not be seen. Then she began to weep, and she wept and wept as if she could never be comforted. And in the midst of her weeping she heard a voice saying to her.
　　“What ails you, King's daughter
 The tears would melt a heart of stone. ”
　　And when she looked to see where the voice came from, there was nothing but a frog stretching his thick ugly head out of the water.
　　“Oh, is it you, old waddler
”said she. “I weep because my golden ball has fallen into the well. ”
　　“Never mind, do not weep, ”answered the frog; “I can help you; but what will you give me if I fetch up your ball again
”
　　“Whatever you like, dear frog, ”said she; “any of my clothes, my pearls and jewels, or even the golden crown that I wear. ”
　　“Your clothes, your pearls and jewels, and your golden crown are not for me. ” answered the frog; “but if you would love me, and have me for your companion and playfellow, and let me sit by you at table, and eat from your plate, and drink from your cup, and sleep in your little bed-if you would promise all this, then would I dive below the water and fetch you your golden ball again. ”
　　“Oh, yes,” she answered; “I will promise it all, whatever you want, if you will only get me my ball again. ”
　　But she thought to herself, “what nonsense he talks! as if he could do anything but sit in the water and croak with the other frogs, or could possibly be anyone's companion. ”
　　But the frog, as soon as he heard her promise, drew his head under the water and sank down out of sight. But after a while he came to the surface again with the ball in his mouth, and he threw it on the grass.
　　The King's daughter was overjoyed to see her pretty plaything again, and she caught it up and ran off with it.
　　“Stop, stop! ”cried the frog. “Take me up, too; I cannot run as fast as you!”
　　But it was of no use. The King's daughter would not listen to his croaking, but made haste home, and very soon forgot all about the poor frog, who had to betake himself to his well again.
　　The next day, when the King's daughter was sitting at table with the King and all the court, and eating from her golden plate, there came a knocking at the door, and a voice crying, “Youngest King's daughter, let me in!”
　　And she got up and ran to see who it could be, but when she opened the door, there was the frog sitting outside. Then she shut the door hastily and went back to her seat, feeling very uneasy. The King noticed how quickly her heart was beating and said:
　　“My child, what are you afraid of
 Is there a giant standing at the door ready to carry you away
”
　　“Oh, no, ”answered she; “No giant, but a horrid frog. ”
　　“And what does the frog want
” asked the King.
　　“O dear father,” answered she, “when I was sitting by the well yesterday, and playing with my golden ball, it fell into the water, and while I was crying for the loss of it, the frog came and got it again for me on condition I would let him be my companion, but I never thought that he could leave the water and come after me; but now there he is outside the door, and he wants to come in to me. ”
　　And then they all heard him knocking the second time and crying:
　　“Youngest King's daughter,
　　Open to me!
　　By the well water
　　What promised you me

　　Youngest King's daughter
　　Now open to me!”
　　“ That which you have promised must you perform, ”said the king; “so go now and let him in. ”
　　So she went and opened the door, and the frog hopped in, following at her heels, till she reached her chair. Then he stopped and cried:
　　“Lift me up to sit by you. ”
　　But she delayed doing it until the King ordered her. When once the frog was on the chair, he wanted to get on the table; and there he sat and said! “Now push your golden plate a little nearer, so that we may eat together. ”
　　And so she did; but everybody saw how unwilling she was, and the frog feasted heartily, butevery morsel seemed to stick in her throat.
　　“I have had enough now,” said the frog at last, “And as I am tired, you must carry me to your room, and make ready your silken bed, and we will lie down and go to sleep.”
　　Then the King's daughter began to weep, and was afraid of the cold frog; she could not even touch him, and now he actually wanted to sleep in her pretty clean bed. Now the King grew angry with her, saying:
　　“That which you have promised in your time of necessity, must you now perform.”
　　So she picked up the frog with her finger and thumb, carried him upstairs and put him in a corner, and when she had lain down to sleep, he came creeping up, saying!“I am tired and want sleep as much as you; take me up, or I will tell your father.”
　　Then she felt beside herself with the rage, and picking him up, she threw the frog with all her strength against the wall, crying:
　　“Now will you be quiet, you horrid frog!”
　　But as he fell, he ceased to be a frog, and became all at once a prince with beautiful kind eyes. And it came to pass that, with her father's consent, they became bride and bridegroom. And he told her how a wicked witch had bound him by her spells, and how no one but she alone could have released him, and that they two would go together to his father's kingdom. And there came to the door a carriage drawn by eight white horses, with white plumes on their heads, and with golden harness, and behind the carriage was standing faithful Henry, the servant of the young prince. Now, faithful Henry had suffered such care and pain when his master was turned into a frog, that he had been obliged to wear three iron bands over his heart, to keep it from breaking with trouble and anxiety. When the carriage started to take the prince to his kingdom, and faithful Henry had helped them both in, he got up behind, and was full of joy at his master's deliverence. And when they had gone a part of the way, the prince heard a sound at the back of the carriage, as if something had broken, and he turned round and cried:
　　“Henry, the wheel must breaking!”but Henry answered:
　　“The wheel does not break,
　　Tis the band round my heart
　　That, to lessen its ache,
　　When I grieved for your sake,
　　I bound round my heart.”
　　Again, and yet once again there was the same sound, and the prince thought it must be the wheel breaking, but it was the breaking of the other bands from faithful Henry's heart, Because it was now so relieved and happy.
　　touch [t)tM]vt.






■ Rapunzel
　　There once lived a man and his wife, who had long wished for a child, but in vain. Now there was at the back of their house a little window which overlooked a beautiful garden full of the finest vegetables and flowers; but there was a high wall all round it, and no one ventured into it, for it belonged to a witch of great might, and of whom all the world was afraid. One day, when the wife was standing at the window, and looking into the garden, she saw a bed filled with the finest rampion; and it looked so fresh and green that she began to wish for some; and at length she longed for it greatly.
　　This went on for days, and she knew she could not get the rampion, she pined away, and grew pale and miserable. Then the man was uneasy, and asked:
　　“What is the matter, dear wile？”
　　“Oh,” answered she,“I shall die unless I can have some of that rampion to eat that grows in the garden at the back of our house.
　　The man, who loved her very much, thought to himself:
　　“Rather than lose my wife I will get some rampion, cost what it will.”
　　So in the twilight he climbed over the wall into the witch's garden, plucked hastily a handful of rampion and brought it to his wife. She made a salad of it at once, and ate of it to her heart's content. But she liked it so much, and it tasted so good, that the next day she longed for it thrice as much as she had done before; if she was to have any rest the man must climb over the wall once more. So he went in the twilight again; and as he was climbing back, he saw, all at once, the witch standing before him, and was terribly frightened, as she cried, with angry eyes:
　　“How dare you climb over into my garden like a thief, and steal my rampion! It shall be the worse for you!”
　　“ Oh,” answered he,“ be merciful rather than just. I have only done it through necessity; for my wife saw your rampion out of the window, and became possessed with so great a longing that she would have died if she could not have had some to eat.”Then the witch said:
　　“If what you tell me is true, you may have as much rampion as you like, on one condition-the child thatwill come into the world must be given to me. I will be kind to the child, and care for it like a mother.”
　　In his distress of mind the man promised everything; and when the time came when the child was born, the witch appeared and, giving the child the name of Rapunzel(which is the same as rampion), she took it away with her.
　　Rapunzel was the most beautiful child in the world. When she was twelve years old the witch shut her up in a tower in the midst of a wood, and it had neither steps nor door, only a small window above. When the witch wished to be let in, she would stand below and would cry:
　　“Rapunzel, Rapunzel! Let down your hair!”
　　Rapunzel had beautiful long hair that shone like gold. When she heard the voice of the witch she would undo the fastening of the upper window, unbind the plaits of her hair, and let it down twenty ells below, and the witch would climb up by it. After they had lived thus a few years it happened that as the King's son was riding through the wood, he came to the tower; and as he drew near he heard a voice singing so sweetly that he stood still and listened. It was Rapunzel in her loneliness trying to pass away the time with sweet songs. The King's son wished to go in to her, and sought to find a door in the tower, but there was none. So he rode home, but the song had entered into his heart, and every day he went into the wood and listened to it. Once, as he was standing there under a tree, he saw the witch come up, and listened while she called out:
　　“O Rapunzel, Rapunzel!Let down your hair.”
　　Then he saw how Rapunzel let down her long tresses, and how the witch climbed up by it and went in to her, and he said to himself:
　　“Since that is the ladder, I will climb it, and seek my fortune.” And the next day, as soon as it began to grow dusk, he went to the tower and cried:
　　“O Rapunzel, Rapunzel! Let down your hair.” And she let down her hair, and the King's son climbed up by it.
　　Rapunzel was greatly terrified when she saw that a man had come in to her, for she had never seen one before; but the King's son began speaking so kindly to her, and told how her singing had entered into his heart, so that he could have no peace until he had seen her herself. Then Rapunzel forgot her terror, and when he asked her to take him for her husband, and she saw that he was young and beautiful, she thought to herself:
　　“I certainly like him much better than the old mother Gothel,” and she put her hand into his hand, saying:
　　“I would willingly go with you, but I do not know how I shall get out. When you come, bring each time a silken rope, and I will make a ladder, and when it is quite ready I will get down by it out of the tower, and you shall take me away on your horse.”They agreed that be should come to her every evening, as the old woman came in the daytime. So the witch knew nothing of all this until once Rapunzel said to her unwittingly:
　　“You are much heavier to draw up, Mother Gothel, than the King's son, who has just left me!” “O wicked child,” cried the witch,“What is this I hear! I thought I had hidden you from all the world, and you have betrayed me!”
　　In her anger she seized Rapunzel by her beautiful hair, struck her several times with her left hand, and then grasping a pair of shears in her right—snip, snip－the beautiful locks lay on the ground. And she was so hard-hearted that she took Rapunzel and put her in a waste and desert place, where she lived in great woe and misery.
　　The same day on which she took Rapunzel away she went back to the tower in the evening and made fast the severed locks of hair to the window hasp, and the King's son came and cried:
　　“Rapunzel, Rapunzel! Let down your hair”
　　Then she let the hair down, and the King's son climbed up, but instead of his dearest Rapunzel he found the witch looking at him with wicked, glistening eyes.
　　“ Aha!” cried she, mocking him,“ you came foryour darling, but the sweet bird sits no longer in the nest, and sings no more; the cat has got her, and will scratch out your eyes as well! Rapunzel is lost to you; you will see her no more.”
　　The King's son was beside himself with grief, and in his agony he sprang from the tower: he escaped with life, but the thorns on which he fell put out his eyes. Then he wandered blind through the wood, eating nothing but roots and berries, and doing nothing but lament and weep for the loss of his dearest wife.
　　So he wandered several years in misery until at last he came to the desert place where Rapunzel lived with her twin-children that she had borne, a boy and a girl. At first he heard a voice that he thought he knew, and when he reached the place from which it seemed to come Rapunzel knew him, and fell on his neck and wept. And when her tears touched his eyes they became clear again, and he could see with them as well as ever.
　　Then he took her to his kingdom, where he was received with great joy, and there they lived long and happily.
　　draw [dr&:]vi.(drew [dru:],



　　”



■ Snow-White and Rose-Red
　　Once there was a poor widow who lived alone in her hut with her two little children, who were called Snow-White and Rose-Red, because they were like the flowers which bloomed on two rose-bushes which grew before the cottage. But they were as pious, good, industrious, and amiable children as any that were in the world, only Snow-White was more quiet and gentle than Rose-Red. For Rose-Red would run and jump about the meadows, seeking flowers and catching butterflies, while Snow-White sat at home helping her mother to keep house, or reading to her if there were nothing else to do. The two children loved one another dearly, and always walked hand in hand when they went out together; and when they talked of it they agreed that they would never separate from each other, and that whatever one had the other should share. Often they ran deep into the forest and gathered wild berries; but no beast ever harmed them. For the hare would eat cauliflowers out of their hands, the fawn would graze at their side, the goats would frisk about them in play, and the birds remained perched on the boughs singing as if nobody were near. No accident ever befell them; and if they stayed late in the forest, and night came upon them, they used to lie down on the moss and sleep till morning; and because their mother knew they would do so, she felt no concern about them. One time when they had thus passed the night in the forest, and the dawn of morning awoke them, they saw a beautiful child dressed in shining white sitting near their couch. She got up and looked at them kindly, but without saying anything went into the forest. The children saw they had slept close to the edge of a pit, into which they would have certainly fallen had they walked farther in the dark. Their mother told them the figure was doubtless the good angel who watches over children.
　　Snow-White and Rose-Red kept their mother's cottage so clean that it was a pleasure to enter it. Every morning in the summer-time Rose-Red would first put the house in order, and then gather a nose gay for her mother, in which she always placed a bud from each rose tree. Every winter's morning Snow-White would light the fire and put the kettle on to boil, and although the kettle was made of copper it yet shone like gold, because it was scoured so well. In the evening, when the flakes of snow were falling, the mother would say;“Go, Snow White, and bolt the door”;and then they used to sit down on the hearth, and the mother would put on her spectacles and read out of a great book while her children sat spinning. By their side, too, lay a little lamb, and on a perch behind them a little white dove reposed with her head under her wing.
　　One evening, when they were thus sitting comfortably together, there came a knock at the door as if somebody wished to come in.“Make haste, Rose-Red,” cried her mother;“make haste and open the door; perhaps there is some traveler outside who needs shelter.”So Rose-Red went and drew the bolt and opened the door, expecting to see some poor man outside, but instead, a great fat Bear poked his black head in. Rose-Red shrieked out and ran back, the little lamb bleated, the dove fluttered on her perch, and Snow-White hid herself behind her mother's bed. The bear, however, began to speak, and said.“Be not afraid, I will do you no harm; but I am half frozen, and wish to come in and warm myself.”
　　“Poor Bear!”cried the mother.“Come in and lie down before the fire; but take care you do not burn your skin”; and then she continued:“Come here, Rose-Red and Snow-White, the Bear will not harm you, he means honorably.” So they both came back, and by degrees the lamb, too, and thedove overcame their fears and welcomed the rough visitor.
　　“You children,”said the Bear, before he entered, “come and knock the snow off my coat.” And they fetched their brooms and swept him clean. Then he stretched himself before the fire and grumbled out his satisfaction; and in a little while the children became familiar enough to play tricks with the unwildly animal. They pulled his long, shaggy skin, set their feet upon his back and rolled him to and fro, and even ventured to beat him with a hazel stick, laughing when he grumbled. The bear bore all their tricks good-temperedly, and if they hit him too hard he cried out:
　　“Leave me my life, you children,
　　Snow-White and Rose-Red,
　　Or you'll never wed.”
　　When bedtime came and others were gone, the mother said to the Bear:“You may sleep here on the hearth if you like, and you will be safely protected from the cold and bad weather.”
　　As soon as day broke the two children let the Bear out again, and he trotted away over the snow, and ever afterwards he came every evening at a certain hour. He would lie down on the hearth and allow the children to play with him as much as they liked, till by degrees they became so accustomed to him that the door was left unbolted till their black friend arrived.
　　But as soon as spring returned, and everything out of doors was green gagin, the Bear one morning told Snow-White that he must leave her, and could not return during the whole summer.“Where are you going, then, dear Bear
” asked Snow-White. “ I am obliged to go into the forest and guard my treasures from the evil Dwarfs; for in winter, when ground is hard , they are obliged to keep in their holes, and cannot work through; but now, since the sun has thawed the earth and warmed it, the Dwarfspierce through, and steal all they can find; and what has once passed into their hands, and gets concealed by them in their caves, is not easily brought to light.” Snow-White, however, was very sad at the departure of the Bear, and opened the door so hesitatingly that when he pressed through it he left behind on the latch a piece of his hairy coat; and through the hole which was made in his coat SnowWhite fancied she saw the glittering of gold; but she was not quite certain of it. The Bear, however, ran hastily away, and was soon hidden behind the trees.
　　Some time afterwards the mother sent the children into the wood to gather sticks; and while doing so, they came to a tree which was lying across the path, on the trunk of which something kept bobbing up and down from the grass, and they could not imagine what it was. When they came nearer they saw a Dwarf , with an old wrinkled face and a Snow-White beard a yard long. The end of this beard was fixed on a split of the tree, and the little man kept jumping about like a dog tied by a chain, for he did not know how to free himself. He glared at the maidens with his red fiery eyes, and exclaimed, “Why do you stand there
 Are you going to pass without offering me any assistance
 ” “What have you done, little man
” asked Rose-Red. “You stupid , gaping goose ! ” exclaimed he. “I wanted to have the tree split, in order to get a little wood for my kitchen, for the little wood which we use is soon burned up with great fagots, not like what you rough, greedy people devour! I had driven the wedge in properly, and everything was going on well, when the smooth wood flew upward, and the tree closed so suddenly together that I could not draw my beautiful beard out, and here it sticks and I cannot get away, There, don't laugh, you milk-faced things! Are you dumbfounded
”
　　The children took all the pains they could to pull the Dwarf's beard out; but without success. “I will run and fetch some help, ”cried Rose-Red at length. “Crack-brained sheepshead that you are!” snarled the Dwarf. “What are you going to call other people for
 You are too many now for me; can you think of nothing else
”
　　“Don't be impatient,” replied Snow-White; “I have thought of something ”; and pulling her scissors out of her pocket she cut off the end of the beard. As soon as the Dwarf found himself at liberty, he snatched up his sack, which lay between the roots of the tree, filled with gold, and throwing it over his shoulder marched off , grumbling and groaning and crying:“ Stupid people! to cut off a piece of my beautiful beard. Plague take you ! ” and away he went without once looking at the children.
　　Some time afterwards Snow-White and Rose-Red went fishing, and as they neared the pond they saw something like a great locust hopping about on the bank, as if going to jump into the water.They ran up and recognized the Dwarf. “What are you after
” asked Rose-Red. “You will fall into the water. ” “ I am not quite such a simpleton as that , ” replied the Dwarf ; “ but do you not see this fish will pull me in
” The little man had been sitting there angling, and unfortunately the wind had entangled his beard with the fishing line; and so a great fish bit at the bait, the strength of the weak little fellow was not able to draw it out, and the fish had the best of struggle. The Dwarf held on by the reeds and rushes which grew near; but to no purpose, for the fish pulled him where it liked, and he must soon have been drawn into the pond. Luckily just then the two maidens arrived , and tried to release the beard of the Dwarf from the fishing line; but both were too closely entangled for it to be done. So the maiden pulled out her scissors again and cut off another piece of the beard. When the Dwarf saw this done he was in a great rage, and exclaimed : “ You donkey ! That is the way to disfigure my face. Was it not enough to cut itonce, but you must now take away the best part of my fine beard
 I dare not show myself again now to my own people. I wish you had run the soles off your boots before you had come here ! ” So saying, he took up a bag of pearls which lay among the rushes , and without speaking another word, slipped off and disappeared behind a stone.
　　Not many days after this adventure, it chanced that the mother sent the two maidens to the next town to buy thread, needles and pins, laces and ribbons. Their road passed over a common , on which here and there great pieces of rock were lying about. Just over their heads they saw a great bird flying round and round, and every now and then dropping lower and lower, till at last it flew down behind a rock. Immediately afterwards they heard a piercing shriek, and running up they saw with affright that the eagle had caught their old acquaintance, the Dwarf, and was trying to carry him off. The compassionate children thereupon laid hold of the little man, and held him fast till the bird gave up the struggle and flew off. As soon then as the Dwarf had recovered from his fright, he exclaimed in his sqeaking voice: “Could you not hold me more gently
 You have seized my fine brown coat in such a manner that it is ail torn and full of holes, meddling and interfering rubbish that you are!”With these words he shoul -dered a bag filled with precious stones, and slipped away to his cave among the rocks.
　　The maidens were now accustomed to his ingratitude, and so they walked on to the town and transacted their business there. Coming home, theyreturned over the same common, and unawares walked up to a certain clean spot on which the Dwarf had shaken out his bag of precious stones, thinking nobody was near. The sun was shining, and the bright stones gilttered in its beams and displayed such a variety of colors that the two maidens stopped to admire them.
　　“What are you standing there gaping for
”asked the Dwarf, while his face grew as red as copper with rage; he was continuing to abuse the poor maidens, when a loud roaring noise was heard, and presently a great black Bear came rolling out of the forest. The Dwarf jumped up terrified, but he could not gain his retreat before the Bear overtook him. Thereupon, he cried out: “Spare me, my dear Lord Bear ! I will give you all my treasures. See these beautiful precious stones which lie here; only give me my life ; for what have you to fear from a little weak fellow like me
 You could not touch me with your big teeth. There are two wicked girls, take them; they would make nice meals, as fat as young quails; eat them for heaven's sake. ”
　　The Bear, however, without troubling himself to speak , gave the bad-hearted Dwarf a single blow with his paw, and he never stirred after.
　　The maidens were then going to run away, but the Bear called after them: “Snow-White and RoseRed , fear not ! Wait a bit and I will accompany you. ” They recognized his voice and stopped; and when the Bear came, his rough coat suddenly fell off, and he stood up a tall man, dressed entirely in gold. “I am a king's son, ”he said , “And I was condemned by the wicked Dwarf , who stole all my treasures, to wander about in this forest, in the form of a bear, till his death released me. Now he has received his well deserved punishment. ”
　　Then they went home, and Snow-White was married to the prince, and Rose-Red to his brother, with whom they shared the immense treasure which the Dwarf had collected. The old mother also lived for many years happily with her two children, and the rose trees which had stood before the cottage were planted now before the palace, and produced every year beautiful red and white rosses.
　　overcome [
+uv+'k)m]vt. (overcame [
　　satisfaction [
　　gather ['g$J+]vt.
　　disappear [
　　interfering [
　　overtake [
+uv+'teik]vt. (overtook [
+uv+'tuk]，overtaken [



　　p. 72“What are you standing there gaping for？” asked the Dwarf，while his face grew as red as copper with rage，…
　　p. 72… he was continuing to abuse the poor maidens， when a loud roaring noise was heard，…
　　p. 48…she took Rapunzel and put her in a waste and desert place，where she lived in great woe and misery.
　　p. 70…they saw a great bird flying round and round， and every now and then dropping lower and lower， till at last it flew down behind a rock.
　　p. 16 She called to each of them by name，but nobody answered，until she came to the name of the youngest.
　　p. 34 Now， faithful Henry had suffered such care and pain when his master was turned into a frog，that he had been obliged to wear three iron bands over his heart， to keep it from breaking with trouble and anxiety.
　　p. 6…， and at night， when everything was finished， they laid the gifts together on the table， instead of the cut-out work， and placed themselves so that they could observe how the little men would behave.
　　p. 26…，as soon as he heard her promise，…
　　p. 4 As soon as it was midnight they saw come in two neatly-formed naked little men，…
　　p. 22 the King's daughter used to go forth into the wood and sit by the brink of the cool well， and if the time seemed long， she would take out a golden ball， and throw it up and catch it again，…
　　p. 42 When the witch wished to be let in，she would stand below and would cry，…
　　p. 54…； and if they stayed late in the forest， and night came upon them， they used to lie down on the moss and sleep till morning；…
　　p. 24…a frog stretching his thick ugly head out of the water.
　　p. 28 Is there a giant standing at the door ready to carry you away？
　　p. 70 a piercing shriek in his squeaking voice
　　p. 72 a loud roaring noise
　　p. 54 a beautiful child dressed in shining white
　　p. 6 neat little garments put ready for them
　　p. 34 And there came to the door a carriage drawn by eight white horses，…
　　p. 4 neatly-formed naked little men
　　p. 6 the pieces of prepared leather
　　p. 74 Now he has received his well deserved punishment.
　　p. 10 someone came knocking at the house door…
　　p. 32 He came creeping up，saying…
　　p. 56…while her children sat spinning…
　　p. 16…there they saw the wolf lying under a tree，and snoring so that the branches shook.
　　p. 44…，as he drew near，he heard a voice singing so sweetly that he stood still and listened.
　　p. 46…he found the witch looking at him with wicked， glistening eyes.
　　p. 72 The Dwarf jumped up terrified，…
　　p. 54…，and the birds remained perched on the boughs singing as if nobody were near.
　　p. 2…he found the pair of shoes made and finished，…
　　p. 8 Then they hopped and danced about， jumping over the chairs and tables，…
　　p. 32 Now the King grew angry with her，saying…
　　p. 12 But the miller refused，thinking the wolf must be meaning harm to someone.



　　(a)The Elves and Shoemaker
　　(b)The Wolf and the Seven Little Goats
　　(c)Snow-White and Rose-Red
　　(1) make haste (2) as soon as (3) take care of
　　(4) be fond of (5) by name (6) so～that
　　(7) so that～ may (8) because of (9) at last
　　(10) make ready (11) go to sleep (12) come to pass
　　(13) keep…from～ing (14) for one's sake (15) a lump of(a pair of)
　　(16) be able to (17) in surprise (18) in vain
　　(19) it happened that～ (20) instead of
　　(1) a little (2) little (3) a few (4) few
　　(5)some (6)much (7)many (8)pretty
　　(9)beautiful (10)handsome (11)several (12)right
　　(13)wrong (14)correct (15)poor (16)miserable
　　(17)once (18)once upon a time (19) rather (20)more
　　(1) hear (2) lay (3) pay (4) say
　　(5) have (6) tell (7) make (8) leap
　　(9) send (10) spend (11) run (12) sing
　　(13) break (14) speak (15) do (16) rise
　　(17) lie (18) fall (19) see (20) eat
　　(1) day (2) wife (3) shoes (4) branch
　　(5)leaves (6)children (7)fish (8)man
　　(9) roof (10) wolf (11) half (12) knife
　　(13) feet (14) tooth (15) life
　　(1) In the morning, after he had said his prayers, he found( ) of shoes made and finished.
　　(2)He( )very much astonished.
　　(3)A customer gave him( ) much money that he was able to buy leather enough for four new shoes.
　　(4)While I am gone, be on your guard( ) the wolf.
　　(5) The wolf often disguises( ), but he may always be known( ) his hoarse voice.
　　(6) We will take good care( ) ourselves.
　　(7) It was not long before someone came knocking( ) the door.
　　(8) Show us your paws so that we( ) know if you are really our mother or not.
　　(9)The little goats tried to hide( ).
　　(10) Not long after, the mother goat came( ) from the wood.
　　(11) The mother goat looked( )the wolf carefully on all side.
　　(12)It happened one day( )the golden ball dropped to the ground near the edge of the well and rolled in.
　　(13) The well was so deep that the bottom( ) not be seen.
　　(14)She looked to see where the voice came( ).
　　(15)If you would promise all this, I( )dive below the water and fetch you your golden ball.
　　(16)The garden belonged( )a witch of great might.
　　(17)All the world was afraid( )the witch.
　　(18)Every day the prince went into the wood and listened( )the sweetsong.
　　(19)He heard a voice( )so sweetly that he stood still and listened.
　　(20)As( )as it began to dusk, the prince went to the tower in the wood.



　　The Elves and the Shoemaker
　　1. At the beginning of the story, the shoemaker was very poor because ________.
　　[ ]
A. he was not diligent enough.
　　B. he had to support a large family.
　　C. he was poor in skill.
　　D. he was unlucky.
　　2. Soon the shoemaker was in the way of making a good living because ________.
　　[ ]
A. no matter how much leather he had cut the previous night, it was skilfully made into shoes and sold the next morning.
　　B. each night the elves came and left some money on the table.
　　C. the shoemaker's wife treated the elves well.
　　D. he forced the elves to make shoes for him every night.
　　3. The shoemaker and his wife sat up late one night not long before Christmas because________
　　[ ]
A. they had too much leather to cut out.
　　B. they were curious to know who had been helping them.
　　C. they wanted to catch the thieves.
　　D. they wanted to give some presents to the elves.
　　4. The next morning, the wife suggested making some clothes for the elves because________
　　[ ]
A. she took pity on them.
　　B. the elves asked her for some.
　　C. she wanted to show their gratitude to the elves.
　　D. the shoemaker was afraid that the elves would no longer work for them.
　　1. A：I should say that the shoemaker owed his success solely to his good luck.
　　B： Well ________.Don't you think he worked very hard himself, too. [ ]
A. I don't think so.
　　B. your opinion is a bit one-sided if you ask me.
　　C. I agree with you perfectly.
　　D. I am sure you are wrong.
　　2. A：We were rather surprised about the quality of the shoes you delivered to us last month. We've received some complaints from our customer.
　　B：________. [ ]
A. Oh, it's quite usual. We've had a problem with our machinery.
　　B. This is just an exception. Generally speaking, the quality of our products are good.
　　C. I'm terribly sorry. We've had a slight problem with the machinery. I guarantee it won't happen again.
　　D. Those customers of yours always make a fuss about even the slightest defect.
　　3. A：How pretty your little boots are!
　　B：________. [ ]
A. Thank you. My father gave them to me on my birthday.
　　B. How funny that you should like my worn-out boots.
　　C. Don't flatter me.
　　D. Well, they are just so.
　　4. A：It's my birthday today.
　　B：________. [ ]
A. Do you mean we should have a celebration

　　B. Oh, I'm sick of birthday parties. It's so monotonous.
　　C. Happy birthday to you! May you have many happy returns of the day.
　　D. It's too late for you to tell me now. Otherwise I would give you a present.
　　5. A：There will be a party at my home this sunday. I shall be happy if you would join us.
　　B：________. [ ]
A. I hate parties. It's just a waste of time.
　　B. On the one hand I don't like parties, and on the other hand I have another appointment that day.
　　C. Thanks for the invitation. Unfortunately I have another appointment that day.
　　D. Well, I can't come because my boss has invited me to his party.
　　finished cutting out, and before he went to bed, he said to his wife,
　　How would it be if we were to sit 1 tonight and see who it is that does us this 2 
”
　　His wife agreed, and 3 a light to burn. Then they both hid in a corner of the room, behind some coats 4 were hanging up, and then they began to watch. 5 it was midnight they saw come in two neatly-formed naked little men, who 6 themselves before the shoemaker's table, and took up the work that was already 7 , and began to stitch, to pierce, and to hammer 8 cleverly and quickly with their little fingers that the shoemaker's eyes could scarcely 9 them, so full of wonder was he. And never did they 10 until everything was finished and was standing ready on the table, and then they jumped up and ran off.
　　1.
　　[ ]
A. down B. up
　　C. upright D. behind
　　2.
　　[ ]
A. job B. work
　　C. service D. favour
　　3.
　　[ ]
A. prepare B. set
　　C. brought D. took down
　　4.
　　[ ]
A. that B. who
　　C. where D. when
　　5.
　　[ ]
A. Whenever B. At the time
　　C. At the moment D. As soon as
　　6.
　　[ ]
A. sat B. sitted
　　C. seated D. seat
　　7.
　　[ ]
A. done B. cut
　　C. prepared D. placed
　　8.
　　[ ]
A. very B. very much
　　C. such D. so
　　9.
　　[ ]
A. glimpse B. look at
　　C. follow D. glance at
　　10.
　　[ ]
A. left off B. leave behind
　　C. leave off D. left behind
　　1. He doesn't work but he gets a good________ from his investments.
　　[ ]
A. wages B. earning
　　C. income D. salary
　　2. Jane is far too ________.She must learn to think before she jumps.
　　[ ]
A. impulsive B. intuitive
　　C. instinctive D. intense
　　3. The noise was so ________that only those with excellent hearing were aware of it.
　　[ ]
A. dim B. soft
　　C. gentle D. faint
　　4. The dog felt very ________when its master left the house, dressed for a party.
　　[ ]
A. disillusioned B. disappointed
　　C. cheated D. deceived
　　5. The prisoner ________that he had assaulted a policeman.
　　[ ]
A. refused B. rejected
　　C. denied D. declined
　　6. The train was ________by a heavy snowfall.
　　[ ]
A. postponed B. delayed
　　C. adjourned D. protracted
　　7. A force of desperate men burst out of the besieged city and ________the army that had surrounded them.
　　[ ]
A. won B. submitted
　　C. gained D. defeated
　　8. After the collision he examined the considerable ________to his car.
　　[ ]
A. injuries B. damages
　　C. damage D. destruction
　　9. The jury ________him of having committed the robbery and he was then sentenced to five years' imprisonment.
　　[ ]
A. accused B. charged
　　C. convinced D. convicted
　　10. The bus company apparently ignores the many ________about unpunctuality and overcrowding of buses.
　　[ ]
A. claims B. griefs
　　C. complains D. objections
　　(fault)(through no fault of her own)
　　Ⅰ. 1. D. 2. A. 3. B. 4. C.
　　Ⅱ. 1. B. 2. C. 3. A. 4. C. 5. C.
　　Ⅲ. 1. B. 2. C. 3. B. 4. A. 5. D.
　　6. C. 7. C. 8. D. 9. C. 10. C.
　　Ⅳ. 1. C. 2. A. 3. D. 4. B. 5. C.
　　6. B. 7. D. 8. C. 9. D. 10. C.
　　Ⅴ. 1. Through no fault of her own, the pretty girl was born in a poor family.
　　2. In times of difficulty, some people commit themselves to heaven while others work hard to find a way out.
　　3. Because of his industriousness in his work, he is soon in the way of making a good living.
　　4. Children should learn to be grateful to what their parents have done to them.
　　5. “Does your study go well at school
” the father asked his son.
　　The Frog Prince
　　1. The youngest daughter of the king in the story was ________.
　　[ ]
A. very ugly
　　B. very beautiful
　　C. disliked by the sun
　　D. hated by the moon
　　2. The youngest princess was very much fond of ________.
　　[ ]
A. playing near a pond.
　　B. ball games near a pond in the Palace.
　　C. knitting while sitting by the brink of a well.
　　D. playing with a golden ball near a well in a dark forest not far fromthe palace.
　　3. Why did the youngest princess promise to take the frog back to the palace

　　[ ]
A. Because he looked very interesting.
　　B. Because he wanted to play games with her.
　　C. Because he said he would help her to retrieve the ball from the well.
　　D. Because he saved her from drowning in the well.
　　4. The king was very angry with his daughter at dinner one day because ________.
　　[ ]
A. the frog knocked at the door again and again.
　　B. the princess broke a plate.
　　C. the princess failed to keep her promise.
　　D. the princess forgot to pay money to the frog.
　　5. Which of the following statements is true.
　　[ ]
A. The frog died when the princess dashed him against the wall.
　　B. The king drove the frog out of the palace.
　　C. The princess threw the frog out of the window.
　　D. The frog turned out to be a handsome prince and eventually the princess fell in love with him.
　　1. A：Sorry to be late for the party. I got a bit lost.
　　B：________.
　　[ ]
A. Too bad to have kept us waiting. You should have started earlier.
　　B. Oh, it's all right. We were wondering what had happened to you.
　　C. If there is one thing I hate most, it is people who can't learn to be punctual.
　　D. Don't be late next time, you hear me.
　　2. A：Thank you for coming to dinner with us.
　　B：________.
　　[ ]
A. It's okey.
　　B. Oh, it is worth the trouble of coming here.
　　C. Oh, the pleasure is mine. How kind of you to have invited me.
　　D. Don't mention it. I would love to come if the dishes are better next time.
　　3. A： Surely they should have known we were coming.
　　B： Well, perhaps they hadn't got our letter. ________.
　　[ ]
A. So they could not know we were coming.
　　B. So they should not know we were coming.
　　C. So they might not have known we were coming.
　　D. So they should not have known we were coming.
　　4. A： Tom doesn't pay back his debts. He makes me angry.
　　B： If there is one thing I can't stand ,________.
　　[ ]
A. they are people who don't pay back their debts.
　　B. it is a person who don't pay back his debts.
　　C. it is one who refuse to pay back his debts.
　　D. it is people who don't pay back their debts.
　　5. A ： What a fool you are not to have parked your car in the parking lot.
　　B ： How I wish ________.
　　[ ]
A. I parked my car in the parking lot!
　　B. I had parked my car in the parking lot!
　　C. I didn't just park my car in the street.
　　D. I came by bike instead of by car.
　　Once upon a time there was a wise king who had many pretty daughters. Among the princesses, the youngest was the most beautiful. She liked to play with a golden ball near a well under a linden tree in a dark woodnot far from the palace. One dsy 1 her dismay, the golden ball rolled into the well and 2 to the bottom of the water. She cried and cried for the loss of her ball 3 a frog came to her rescue. He retrieved the ball from the well 4 ondition that from then on the princess would take him back to the palace and 5 him as her playmate. When the princess did not carry 6 her promise, he jumped all the way to the palace and, with the help of the king, forced the princess to take him to her room. There the princess was so angry that she threw him against the wall. To her amasement, the frog changed into a 7 prince and told her that it was a 8 that had turned him into a frog and no one 9 the princess could save him. Later on, the princess and the prince 10 in love with each other and got married. From then on, they lived happily all their life.
　　1.
　　[ ]
A. in B. on
　　C. for D. to
　　2.
　　[ ]
A. floated B. ran
　　C. sank D. sinked
　　3.
　　[ ]
A. to B. which
　　C. until D. since
　　4.
　　[ ]
A. by B. for
　　C. around D. on
　　5.
　　[ ]
A. seem B. regard
　　C. look D. appear
　　6.
　　[ ]
A. out B. on
　　C. forward D. in
　　7.
　　[ ]
A. ugly B. handsome
　　C. beautiful D. pretty
　　8.
　　[ ]
A. wizard B. magician
　　C. witch D. fairy
　　9.
　　[ ]
A. however B. but
　　C. only D. whosoever
　　10.
　　[ ]
A. went B. fallen
　　C. became D. fell
　　1. The________ cats that are still found in some remote places are distantly related to our friendly and tame domestic companions.
　　[ ]
A. savage B. wild
　　C. cruel D. fierce
　　2. The forecast predicted ________ weather with snow, sunshine, wind and thunder and that is just what we have had.
　　[ ]
A. fluctuating B. differing
　　C. various D. variable
　　3. The book proved to be very unreliable and so was quite________ to him in his research.
　　[ ]
A. invaluable B. unimportant
　　C. useless D. unusable
　　4. To our grief, we were told that he had met with a ________of misfortunes.
　　[ ]
A. continuation B. repetition
　　C. succession D. continuity
　　5. His authority and ________make him an excellent leader.
　　[ ]
A. self-consciousness B. self-confidence
　　C. self-centredness D. self-satisfaction
　　6. He broke the world________ for the 100 meter dash.
　　[ ]
A. mark B. level
　　C. standard D. record
　　7. I'd like to________ him to you for the job. He is a most conscientious worker.
　　[ ]
A. suggest B. recommend
　　C. advise D. propose
　　8. Nobody has been able to explain the ________of this commonlyused expressions.
　　[ ]
A. reason B. starting-point
　　C. cause D. origin
　　9. He had an________ habit of emptying ashtrays out of his upstairs window onto our doorstep.
　　[ ]
A. objectionable B. uneducated
　　C. offensive D. uncultivated
　　10. The music aroused an ________feeling of homesickness in him.
　　[ ]
A. intense B. intensive
　　C. intentional D. intending
　　Ⅰ. 1. B. 2. D. 3. C. 4. C. 5. C.
　　Ⅱ. 1. D. 2. C. 3. C. 4. D. 5. B.
　　6. A. 7. B. 8. C. 9. B. 10. D.
　　Ⅲ. 1. D. 2. C. 3. C. 4. D. 5. B.
　　6. A. 7. B. 8. C. 9. B. 10. D.
　　Ⅳ. 1. B. 2. D. 3. C. 4. C. 5. B.
　　6. D. 7. B. 8. D. 9. C. 10. A.
　　Ⅴ. 1. The frog talked to the princess as if he were a human being.
　　2. She lent him＄100 on condition that he would pay her back on his pay day.
　　3. You must perform what you have promised in your time of necessity.
　　4. The little girl followed at her mother's heels into the garden.
　　5. Later the princess consented to marry the frog prince.
　　Snow-White and Rose-Red
　　1. Snow-White got her name because ________.
　　[ ]
A. her complexion was as white as the snow.
　　B. her face was as pale as a person with insufficient nutrition.
　　C. she was as pretty as the white rose that grew in front of her cottage.
　　D. her mother wanted her to be as beautiful as the princess in the story“Snow-White and the Seven Dwarfs”.
　　2. No accident had ever befallen Snow-White and Rose-Red as ________.
　　[ ]
A. they had never quarrelled with each other.
　　B. they were such pious and industrious children.
　　C. they were so obedient and tender to their mother.
　　D. they were guarded by angels from the heaven day and night.
　　3. One winter evening, while the two children were sitting quietly aroundthe fire, a huge black bear rushea into their cottage because ________.
　　[ ]
A. he wanted to eat up the two little girls.
　　B. he wanted to be sheltered from the snow and cold outside.
　　C. he was fond of playing with little girls.
　　D. he was in search of the dwarf who had stolen his treasure.
　　4. How many times had the two little girlssaved the life of the dwarf with long white beard

　　[ ]
A. Once
　　B. Twice
　　C. Three times.
　　D. Four times.
　　5. What is the best word to be used to describe the dwarf from the point of view of the little girls

　　[ ]
A. Vicious.
　　B. Mean and ungrateful.
　　C. Greedy and foolish.
　　D. Ugly but funny.
　　1. A：Do you mind if I call you by your first name Tony

　　B：________.
　　[ ]
A. Not at all. Go ahead.
　　B. Well, we are not familiar enough, I'm afraid.
　　C. How strange that you should get such a queer idea.
　　D. I'd prefer you address me by my family name.
　　2. A：Please have some fish. It's delicious.
　　B：________.
　　[ ]
A. I don't like fish.
　　B. It tastes awful.
　　C. I don't think it is delicious at all.
　　D. Thanks, but I am not particularly keen on fish.
　　3. A： Would you like a cup of coffee

　　B：________.
　　[ ]
A. Yes.
　　B. No.
　　C. Yes, please. I' d love some.
　　D. No. It' s so bitter.
　　4. A： The lights are on, so they must be at home.
　　B： That's right. If they weren't at home, ________.
　　[ ]
A. the lights wouldn't have been on.
　　B. the lights would't be on.
　　C. the lights shouldn't have been on.
　　D. the lights mustn't be on.
　　5. A： He's a maths teacher, isn't he

　　B： Well, he did English at the university ________.
　　[ ]
A. So he mustn't be a maths teacher.
　　B. So he shouldn't be a maths teacher.
　　C. So he can be a maths teacher.
　　D. So he can't be a maths teacher.
　　As soon as spring returned, and everything out of 1 was green again, one morning the bear told Snow-White that he must leave her, and could not return during the whole summer.“Where are you going, then, dear bear
” sked Snow-White,“I am 2 to go into the forest and guard my treasures from the evil Dwarfs; for in winter, when ground is hard, they are obliged to 3 in their holes, and cannot work through; but now since the sun has warmed the earth and 4 it, the Dwarfs pierce through, and steal all they can find; and whatever has once passed 5 their hands, and gets concealed by them in their caves, is not easily brought to 6 ” Snow-White, however, was very sad at the 7 of the Bear, and opened the door so hesitatingly that when he 8 through it he left behind on the latch a piece of his coat Snow-White 9 that she saw the glittering of gold; but she was not quite certain of it. The bear, 10 , ran hastily away, and was soon hidden behind the trees.
　　1.
　　[ ]
A. the window B. the door
　　C. windows D. doors
　　2.
　　[ ]
A. forced B. obliged
　　C. inclined D. reluctant
　　3.
　　[ ]
A. maintain B. sleep
　　C. keep D. staying
　　4.
　　[ ]
A. melted B. softened
　　C. thawed D. carved
　　5.
　　[ ]
A. onto B. into
　　C. off D. under
　　6.
　　[ ]
A. the earth B. the light
　　C. earth D. light
　　7.
　　[ ]
A. sight B. left
　　C. passing D. departure
　　8.
　　[ ]
A. forced B. pressed
　　C. rushed D. sneaked
　　9.
　　[ ]
A. fancied B. imagined
　　C. glanced D. glimpsed
　　10.
　　[ ]
A. but B. however
　　C. startled D. frightened
　　1. He says he would write an English textbook if he could find a(n)________to deal with the less interesting parts.
　　[ ]
A. collaborator B. partner
　　C. accomplice D. ally
　　2. There were so many people that the customs officer didn't bother to ________our luggage.
　　[ ]
A. glance B. check
　　C. ask D. search
　　3. Most people were no longer listening to his long ________ story.
　　[ ]
A. tiring B. boring
　　C. weary D. irritable
　　4. About 7 o'clock in the evening, a storm camp up suddenly. Before we had time to do anything, we were ________.
　　[ ]
A. blinded by the lightning.
　　B. deafened by the lightning.
　　C. unsighted by the lightning.
　　D. unseen by the lightning.
　　5. It is a pity that he is blind ________.
　　[ ]
A. at his own fault.
　　B. to his own fault.
　　C. by his own fault.
　　D. with his own fault.
　　6. This the ________piano on which the composer created some of his greatest works.
　　[ ]
A. actual B. genuine
　　C. real D. original
　　7. I should like to rent a house, modern, comfortable and ________in a quiet neighbourhood.
　　[ ]
A. after all B. first of all
　　C. above all D. before all
　　8. Your teacher has lost his voice and ________ I am taking his place today.
　　[ ]
A. besides B. accordingly
　　C. thereby D. moreover
　　9. A ________ woman is needed to take care of two small children.
　　[ ]
A. confident B. confidential
　　C. dependent D. reliable
　　10. Far more should be done to ________ the sufferings of thousands of homeless people.
　　[ ]
A. alleviate B. improve
　　C. remedy D. house



　　Ⅰ. 1. C. 2. D. 3. B. 4. C. 5. B.
　　Ⅱ. 1. A. 2. D. 3. C. 4. B. 5. D.
　　Ⅲ. 1. D. 2. B. 3. C. 4. C. 5. B.
　　6. D. 7. D. 8. B. 9. A. 10. B.
　　Ⅳ. 1. A. 2. B. 3. B. 4. A. 5. B.
　　6. A. 7. C. 8. B. 9. D. 10. A.
　　Ⅴ. 1. It is snowing so hard outside, you should not venture to go skiing.
　　2. Soon the children became accustomed to the bear's visit every evening.
　　3. It must be funny to see the dwarf's beard entangled with the fishingline.
　　4. It was not until the bear had begun to speak to them that the children became recovered from their fright.
　　5. Why are you standing there gaping at me
 Can't you come over and lend me a hand


※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※

※※※※※※※※※※
※※※※※※※※※※






■ 1 THE BLIND BOY
　　Colley Cibber①
　　O say what is that thing call'd Light,
　　Which I must ne'er enjoy;
　　What are the blessings of the sight.
　　O tell your poor blind boy !
　　You talk of wondrous things you see,
　　You say the sun shines bright;
　　I feel him warm, but how can he
　　Or make it day or night

　　My day or night myself I make
　　Whene'er I sleep or play;
　　And could I ever keep awake
　　With me 'twere always day.
　　With heavy sighs I often hear
　　You mourn my hapless woe;
　　But sure with patience I can bear
　　A loss I ne'er can know
　　Then let not what I cannot have
　　My cheer of mind destroy
　　Whilst thus I sing, I am a king,
　　Although a poor blind boy






■ 2 TO CHARLOTTE PULTENEY
　　Ambrose Philips①
　　Timely blossom, Infant fair,
　　Fondling of a happy pair,
　　Every morn and every night
　　Their solicitous delight,
　　Sleeping, waking, still at ease,
　　Pleasing, without skill to please;
　　Little gossip, blithe and hale,
　　Tattling many a broken tale,
　　Singing many a tuneless song,
　　Lavish of a heedless tongue;
　　Simple maiden, void of art,
　　Babbling out the very heart,
　　Yet abandon'd to thy will,
　　Yet imagining no ill,
　　Yet too innocent to blush;
　　Like the linnet in the bush
　　To the mother-linnet's note
　　Moduling her slender throat;
　　Chirping forth thy petty joys,
　　Wanton in the change of toys,
　　Like the linnet green, in May
　　Flitting to each bloomy spray;
　　Wearied then and glad of rest,
　　Like the linnet in the nest: ----
　　This thy present happy lot,
　　This, in time will be forgot:
　　Other pleasures, other cares,
　　Ever-busy Time prepares;
　　And thou shalt in thy daughter see,
　　This picture, once, resembled thee.






■ 3 THE ECHOING GREEN
　　W illiam Blake①
　　The Sun does arise,
　　And make happy the skies;
　　The merry bells ring
　　To welcome the Spring;
　　The skylark and thrush,
　　The birds of the bush,
　　Sing louder around
　　To the bells' cheerful sound,
　　While our sports shall be seen
　　On the echoing Green.
　　Old John, with white hair,
　　Does laugh away care,
　　Sitting under the oak
　　Among the old folk.
　　They laugh at our play,
　　And soon they all say:
　　"Such, such were the joys
　　When we all, girls and boys,
　　In our youth-time were seen
　　On the echoing Green.
　　Till the little ones, weary,
　　No more can be merry;
　　The Sun does descend,
　　And our sports have an end.
　　Round the laps of their mothers
　　Many sisters and brothers,
　　Like birds in their nest,
　　Are ready for rest,
　　And sport no more seen
　　On the darkening Green.






■ 4 A CRADLE SONG
　　William Blake
　　Sleep, Sleep, beauty bright,
　　Dreaming o'er the joys of night,
　　Sleep, Sleep, in thy sleep
　　Little sorrows sit and weep.
　　Sweet Babe, in thy face
　　Soft desires I can trace,
　　Secret joys and secret smiles,
　　Little pretty infant riles.
　　As thy softest limbs I feel,
　　Smiles as of the morning steal
　　O'er thy cheek and o'er thy breast
　　Where thy little heart does rest.
　　O the cunning wiles that creep
　　In thy little heart asleep!
　　When thy little heart does wake,
　　Then the dreadful lightnings break.






■ 5 NURSE'S SONG
　　William Blake
　　When the voices of children are heard on the green,
　　And laughing is heard on the hill,
　　My heart is at rest within my breast,
　　And every thing else is still.
　　Then come home my children, the sun is gone down,
　　And the dews of night arise.
　　Come, come, leave off play, and let us away
　　Till the morning appears in the skies.
　　No, no, let us play, for it is yet day,
　　And we cannot go to sleep.
　　Besides, in the sky, the little birds fly,
　　And the hills are all coverd with sheep.
　　Well, well, go and play till the light fades away,
　　And then go home to bed.
　　The little ones leaped and shouted and laugh'd,
　　And all the hills echoed.






■ 6 A CHILD
　　Charles and Ma ry Lamb①
　　A child's a plaything for an hour;
　　Its pretty tricks we try
　　For that or for a longer space ----
　　Then tire, and lay it by.
　　But I knew one that to itself
　　All seasons could control;
　　That would have mocked the sense of pain
　　Out of a grieved soul.
　　Thou straggler into loving arms,
　　Young climber-up of knees,
　　When I forget thy thousand ways
　　Then life and all shall cease.






■ 7 "IT IS A BEAUTEOUS EVENING"
　　William Wordsworth①
　　It is a beauteous evening, calm and free;
　　The holy time is quiet as a Nun
　　Breathless with adoration; the broad sun
　　Is sinking down in its tranquillity;
　　The gentleness of heaven broods o'er the Sea:
　　Listen ! the mighty Being is awake,
　　And doth with his eternal motion make
　　A sound like thunder ---- everlastingly.
　　Dear child ! dear girl'! that walkest with me here,
　　If thou appear untouch'd by solemn thought
　　Thy nature is not therefore less divine:
　　Thou liest in Abraham's bosom all the year,
　　And worshipp'st at the Temple's inner shrine,
　　God being with thee when we know it not






■ 8 "THERE WAS A NAUGHTY BOY"
　　John Keats①
　　There was a naughty Boy,
　　And a naughty Boy was he.
　　He ran away to Scotland
　　The people for to see ----
　　'Then he found
　　That the ground
　　W as as hard,
　　That a yard
　　Was as long,
　　That a song
　　Was as merry,
　　That a cherry
　　Was as red ----
　　That lead
　　Was as weighty,
　　That fourscore
　　W as as eighty,
　　That a door
　　Was as wooden
　　As in England ----
　　So he stood in his shoes
　　And he wonder'd ,
　　He wonder'd ,
　　He stood in his shoesAnd he wonder'd.






■ 9 THE BABIE
　　Hugh M iller①
　　Nae shoon to hide her tiny taes,
　　Nae stockings on her feet;
　　Her supple ankles white as snow
　　Of early blossoms sweet.
　　Her simple dress of sprinkled pink,
　　Her double, dimpled chin;
　　Her pucker' d lip and bonny mou' ,
　　With nae ane tooth between.
　　Her een sae like her mither's een,
　　Twa gentle, liquid things;
　　Her face is like an angel's face ----
　　We're glad she has nae wings.






■ 10 CHILDREN
　　Henry Wadswort h Longfellow①
　　Come to me, O ye children !
　　For I hear you at your play,
　　And the questions that perplexed me
　　Have vanished quite away.
　　Ye open the eastern windows,
　　That look towards the sun,
　　Where thoughts are singing swallows
　　And the brooks of morning run.
　　In your hearts are the birds and the sunshine,
　　In your thoughts the brooklet's flow,
　　But in mine is the wind of Autumn
　　And the first fall of the snow.
　　Ah! what would the world be to us
　　If the children were no more

　　We should dread the desert behind us
　　Worse than the dark before
　　What the leaves are to the forest,
　　With light and air for food,
　　Ere their sweet and tender juices
　　Have been hardened into wood, -----
　　That to the world are children;
　　Through them it feels the glow
　　Of a brighter and sunnier climate
　　Than reaches the trunks below.
　　Come to me, O ye children
　　And whisper in my ear
　　What the birds and the winds are singing
　　In your sunny atmosphere.
　　For what are all our contrivings,
　　And the wisdom of our looks,
　　When compared with your caresses,
　　And the gladness of your looks

　　Ye are better than all the ballads
　　That ever were sung or said;
　　For ye are living poems,
　　And all the rest and dead.






■ 11 WE TWO BOYS TOGETHER CLINGING
　　Walt Whitman①
　　We two boys together clinging,
　　One the other never leaving,
　　Up and down the roads going, North and South
　　excursions making,
　　Power enjoying, elbows stretching, fingers clutching,
　　Arm'd and fearless, eating, drinking, sleeping, loving,
　　No law less than ourselves owning, sailing, soldiering,
　　thieving, threatening,
　　Misers, menials, priests alarming, air breathing, water
　　drinking, on the turf or the sea-beach dancing,
　　Cities wrenching, ease scorning, statutes mocking,
　　feebleness chasing,
　　Fulfilling our foray.






■ 12 THE UNSEEN PLAYMATE
　　Robe rt Louis Stevenson①
　　When children are playing alone on the green,
　　In comes the playmate that never was seen.
　　When children are happy and lonely and good,
　　The Friend of the Children comes out of the wood.
　　Nobody heard him and nobody saw,
　　His is a picture you never could draw,
　　But he's sure to be present, abroad or at home,
　　When children are happy and playing alone.
　　He lies in the laurels, he runs on the grass,
　　He sings when you tinkle the musical glass;
　　Whene'er you are happy and cannot tell why,
　　The Firend of the Children is sure to be by !
　　He loves to be little, he hates to be big,
　　'Tis he that inhabits the caves that you dig;
　　'Tis he when you play with your soldiers of tin
　　That sides with the Frenchmen and never can win
　　Tis he, when at night you go off to your bed,
　　Bids you go to your sleep and not trouble your head;
　　For wherever they're lying, in cupboard or shelf,
　　'Tis he will take care of your playthings himself !






■ 13 ESCAPE AT BEDTIME
　　Robert Louis Stevenson
　　The lights from the parlour and kitchen shone out
　　Through the blinds and the windows and bars;
　　And high overhead and all moving about,
　　There were thousands of millions of stars.
　　There ne'er were such thousands of leaves on a tree,
　　Nor of people in church or the Park,
　　As the crowds of the stars that looked down upon me,
　　And that glittered and winked in the dark.
　　The Dog, and the Plough, and the Hunter, and all,
　　And the star of the sailor, and Mars,
　　These shone in the sky, and the pail by the wall
　　Would be half full of water and stars.
　　They saw me at last, and they chased me with cries,
　　And they soon had me packed into bed;
　　But the glory kept shining and bright in my eyes,
　　And the stars going round in my head.






■ 14 TRAVEL
　　Rob ert Louis Stevenson
　　I should like to rise and go
　　Where the golden apples grow;----
　　Where below another sky
　　Parrot islands anchored lie,
　　And, watched by cockatoos and goats, Lonely
　　Crusoes building boats; ----
　　Where in sunshine reaching out
　　Eastern cities, miles about,
　　Are with mosque and minaret
　　Among sandy gardens set,
　　And the rich goods from near and far
　　Hang for sale in the bazaar;----
　　Where the Great Wall round China goes,
　　And on one side the desert blows,
　　And with bell and voice and drum,
　　Cities on the other hum; -----
　　Where are forests, hot as fire,
　　Wide as England, tall as a spire,
　　Full of apes and cocoa-nuts
　　And the negro hunters' huts; ----
　　Where the knotty crocodile
　　Lies and blinks in the Nile.
　　And the red flamingo flies
　　Hunting fish before his eyes; ----
　　Where in jungles, near and far,
　　Man-devouring tigers are,
　　Lying close and giving ear
　　Lest the hunt be drawing near,
　　Or a comer-by be seen
　　Swinging in a palanquin; ----
　　Where among the desert sands
　　Some deserted city stands,
　　All its children, sweep and prince,
　　Grown to manhood ages since,
　　Not a foot in street or house,
　　Not a stir of child or rouse,
　　And when kindly falls the night,
　　In all the town no spark of light.
　　There I'll come when I'm a man
　　With a camel caravan:,
　　Light a fire in the gloom
　　Of some dusty dining-room.;
　　See the pictures on the walls,
　　Heroes, fights and festivals;
　　And in a corner find the toys.
　　Of the old Egyptian boys.






■ 15 MY SHADOW
　　R obert .Louis Stevenson
　　I have a little shadow that goes in and out with me,
　　And what can be the use of him is more than I can see.
　　He is very, very like me from the heels up to the head;
　　And I see him jump before me, when I jump into my bed.
　　The funniest thing about him is the way he likes to grow ----
　　Not at all like proper children, which is always very slow;
　　For he sometimes shoots up taller like an india-rubber ball,
　　And he sometimes gets so little that there' s none of him at all.
　　He hasn't got a notion of how children ought to play,
　　And can only make a fool of me in every sort of way.
　　He stays so close beside me, he's a coward you can see;
　　I' d think shame to stick to nursie as that shadow sticks to me!
　　One morning, very early, before the sun was up,
　　I rose and found the shining dew on every buttercup;
　　But my lazy little shadow, like an arrant sleepy-head,
　　Had stayed at home behind me and was fast asleep in bed.






■ 16 THE SWING
　　R obert Louis Stevenson
　　How do you like to go up in a swing,
　　Up in the air so blue

　　Oh, I do think it the pleasantest thing
　　Ever a child can do !
　　Up in the air and over the wall,
　　Till I can see so wide,
　　Rivers and trees and cattle and all
　　Over the countryside -----
　　Till I look down on the garden green,
　　Down on the roof so brown ----
　　Up in the air I go flying again,
　　Up in the air and down !






■ 17 SWING SONG
　　A. A. Milne①
　　Here I go up in my swing
　　Ever so high.
　　I am the King of the fields, and the King
　　Of the town.
　　I am the King of the earth, and the King
　　Of the sky.
　　Here I go up in my swing …
　　Now I go down.






■ 18 INDEPENDENCE
　　A. A. Milne
　　I never did, I never did, I never did like
　　"Now take care, dear!"
　　I never did, I never did, I never did want
　　"Hold-my-hand";
　　I never did, I never did, I never did think much of
　　"Not up there, dear! "
　　It's no good saying it . They don't understand






■ 19 FURRY BEAR
　　A. A. Milne
　　If I were bear,
　　And a big bear too,
　　I shouldn't much care
　　If it froze or snew;
　　I shouldn't much mind
　　If it snowed or friz----
　　I'd be all fur-lined
　　With a coat like his!
　　For I'd have for boots and a brown fur wrap,
　　And brown fur knickers and a big fur cap.
　　I'd have a fur muffle-ruff to cover my jaws,
　　And brown fur mittens on my big brown paws.
　　With a big brown furry-down up to my head,
　　I'd sleep all the winter in a big fur bed.









■ 20 ARIEL'S SONG
　　William S hakespeare①
　　Where the bee sucks, there suck I:
　　In a cowslip's bell I lie;
　　There I couch when owls do cry.
　　On the bat's back I do fly
　　After summer merrily:
　　Merrily, merrily shall I live now
　　Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.






■ 21 SPRING
　　William Blake
　　Sound the Flute!
　　Now it's mute.
　　Birds delight
　　Day and Night.
　　Nightingale
　　In the dale,
　　Lark in Sky
　　Merrily
　　Merrily Merrily to welcome in the Year.
　　Little Boy
　　Full of joy.
　　Little Girl
　　Sweet and small.
　　Cock does crow,
　　So do you.
　　Merry voice,
　　Infant noise,
　　Merrily Merrily to welcome in the Year
　　Little Lamb,
　　Here I am,
　　Come and lick
　　My white neck.
　　Let me pull
　　Your soft Wool.
　　Let me kiss
　　Your soft face
　　Merrily Merrily we welcome in the Year






■ 22 THE LILY
　　William Blake
　　The modest Rose puts forth a thorn;
　　The humble Sheep, a threatning horn.
　　While the Lilly white, shall in Love delight,
　　Nor a thorn nor a threat stain her beauty bright






■ 23 THE SHEPHERD
　　William Blake
　　How sweet is the Shepherd's sweet lot,
　　From the morn to the evening he strays
　　He shall follow his sheep all the day,
　　And his tongue shall be filled with praise.
　　For he hears the lambs' innocent calls
　　And he hears the ewes' tender reply,
　　He is watchful while they are in peace,
　　For they know when their Shepherd is nigh






■ 24 A BOY'S SONG
　　James Hogg①
　　Where the pools are bright and deep,
　　Where the grey trout lies asleep,
　　Up the river and over the lea,
　　That's the way for Billy and me.
　　Where the blackbird sings the latest,
　　Where the hawthorn blooms the sweetest,
　　Where the nestlings chirp and flee,
　　That's the way for Billy and me.
　　Where the mowers mow the cleanest,
　　Where the hay lies thick and greenest,
　　There to track the homeward bee,
　　That's the way for Billy and me.
　　Where the hazel bank is steepest,
　　Where the shadow lies the deepest,
　　Where the clustering nuts fall free,
　　That's the way for Billy and me.
　　Why the boys should drive away
　　Little sweet maidens from the play,
　　Or love to banter and fight so well,
　　That's the thing I never could tell.
　　But this I know, I love to play,
　　Through the meadow, among the hay;
　　Up the water and over the lea,
　　That's the way for Billy and me.






■ 25 THE RAINBOW
　　William Wordsworth
　　My heart leaps up when I behold
　　A rainbow in the sky:
　　So was it when my life began;
　　So is it now I am a man;
　　So be it when I shall grow old,
　　Or let me die !
　　The Child is father of the Man;
　　And I could wish my days to be
　　Bound each to each by natural piety.






■ 26 THE STAR
　　Jane Ta ylor①
　　Twinkle, twinkle, little star !
　　How I wonder what you are,
　　Up above the world so high,
　　Like a diamond in the sky.
　　When the blazing sun is gone,
　　When he nothing shines upon,
　　Then you show your little light,
　　Twinkle, twinkle all the night
　　The dark blue sky you keep
　　And often thro' my curtains peep,
　　For you never shut your eye
　　Till the sun is in the sky.
　　'Tis your bright and tiny spark
　　Lights the traveller in the dark;
　　Though I know not what you are,
　　Twinkle, twinkle, little star !






■ 27 A SPRING SONG
　　Mary Howitt①
　　See the yellow catkins cover
　　All the slender willows over;
　　And on mossy banks so green
　　Star-like primroses are seen;
　　And their clustering leaves below
　　White and purple violets grow.
　　Hark the little lambs are bleating,
　　And the cawing rooks are rneeting
　　In the elms ---- a noisy crowd;
　　And all birds are singing loud,
　　There, the first white butterfly
　　In the sun goes flitting by






■ 28 THE BAREFOOT BOY
　　John Gr eenleaf Whittier①
　　Blessings on thee, little man,
　　Barefoot boy, with cheek of tan!
　　With thy turned-up pantaloons,
　　And thy merry whistled tunes;
　　With thy red lip, redder still
　　Kissed by strawberries on the hill;
　　With the sunshine on thy face,
　　Through thy torn brim's jaunty grace
　　From my heart I give thee joy, -----
　　I was once a barefoot boy !
　　Prince thou art, ---- the grown-up man
　　Only is republican.
　　Let the million-dollared ride
　　Barefoot, trudging at his side,
　　Thou hast more than he can buy
　　In the reach of ear and eye, ----
　　Outward sunshine, inward joy:
　　Blessings on thee, barefoot boy !
　　Oh for boyhood's painless play,
　　Sleep that wakes in laughing day,
　　Health that mocks the doctor's rules,
　　Knowledge never learned of schools,
　　Of the wild bee's morning chase,
　　Of the wild-flower's time and place,
　　Flight of fowl and habitude
　　Of the tenants of the wood;
　　How the tortoise bears his shell,
　　How the tortoise bears his shell,
　　And the ground-mole sinks his well;
　　How the robin feeds her young,
　　How the oriole's nest is hung;
　　Where the whitest lilies blow,
　　Where the freshest berries grow,
　　Where the ground-nut trails its vine,
　　Where the wood-grape's clusters shine;
　　Of the black wasp's cunning way,
　　Mason of his walls of clay,
　　And the architectural plans
　　Of gray hornet artisans!
　　For, eschewing books and tasks,
　　Nature answers all he asks;
　　Hand in hand with her he walks,
　　Face to face with her he talks,
　　Part and parcel of her joy,----
　　Blessings on the barefoot boy!
　　Oh for boyhood's time of June,
　　Crowding years in one brief moon,
　　When all things I heard or saw,
　　Me, their master, waited for.
　　I was rich in flowers and trees,
　　Humming-birds and honey-bees;
　　For my sport the squirrel played,
　　Plied the snouted mole his spade;
　　For my taste the blackberry cone
　　Purpled over hedge and stone;
　　Laughed the brook for my delight
　　Through the day and through the night,
　　Whispering at the garden wall,
　　Talked with me from fall to fall;
　　Mine the sand-rimmed pickerel pond,
　　Mine the walnut slopes beyond,
　　Mine, on bending orchard trees,
　　Apples of Hesperides!
　　Still as my horizon grew,
　　Larger grew my riches too;
　　All the world I saw or knew
　　Seemed a complex Chinese toy,
　　Fashioned for a barefoot boy!
　　Oh for festal dainties spread,
　　Like my bowl of milk and bread;
　　Pewter spoon and bowl of wood,
　　On the door-stone, gray and rude !
　　O' er me, like a regal tent,
　　Cloudy-ribbed, the sunset bent,
　　Purple-curtained, fringed with gold,
　　Looped in many a wind-swung fold;
　　While for music came the play
　　Of the pied frogs' orchestra;
　　And, to light the noisy choir,
　　Lit the fly his lamp of fire.
　　I was monarch: pomp and joy
　　Waited on the barefoot boy !
　　Cheerily, then, my little man,
　　Live and laugh, as boyhood can !
　　Though the flinty slopes be hard,
　　Stubble-speared the new-mown sward.,
　　Every morn shall lead thee through
　　Fresh baptisms of the dew;
　　Every evening from thy feet
　　Shall the cool wind kiss the heat:
　　All too soon these feet must hide
　　In the prison cells of pride,
　　Lose the freedom of the sod,
　　Like a colt's for work be shod,
　　Made to tread the mills of toil,
　　Up and down in ceaseless moil:
　　Happy if their track be found
　　Never on forbidden ground;
　　Happy if they sink not in
　　Quick and treacherous sands of sin.
　　Ah ! that thou couldst know thy joy,
　　Ere it passes, barefoot boy!






■ 29 THE BROOK
　　Alfred Te nnyson ①
　　I come from haunts of coot and hern,
　　I make a sudden sally,
　　And sparkle out among the fern,
　　To bicker down a valley.
　　By thirty hills I hurry down,
　　Or slip between the ridges,
　　By twenty thorps, a little town,
　　And half a hundred bridges.
　　Till last by Philip's farm I flow
　　To join the brimming river,
　　For men may come and men may go,
　　But I go on for ever.
　　I chatter over stony ways,
　　In little sharps and trebles,
　　I bubble into eddying bays,
　　I babble on the pebbles.
　　With many a curve my banks I fret
　　By many a field and fallow,
　　And many a fairy foreland set
　　With willow-weed and mallow.
　　I chatter, chatter as I flow
　　To join the brimming river,
　　For men may come and men may go,
　　But I go on for ever.
　　I wind about, and in and out,
　　With here a blossom sailing,
　　And here and there a lusty trout,
　　And here and there a grayling,
　　And here and there a foamy flake
　　Upon me, as I travel
　　With many a silvery waterbreak
　　Above the golden gravel,
　　And draw them all along, and flow
　　To join the brimming river,
　　For men may come and men may go,
　　But I go on for ever.
　　I steal by lawns and grassy plots,
　　I slide by hazel covers;
　　I move the sweet forget-me-nots
　　That grow for happy lovers,
　　I slip, I slide, I gloom, I glance,
　　Among my skimming swallows;
　　I make the netted sunbeam dance
　　Against my sandy shallows.
　　I murmur under moon and stars
　　n brambly wildernesses;
　　I linger by my shingly bars;
　　I loiter round my cresses;
　　And out again I curve and flow
　　To join the brimming river,
　　For men may come and men may go,
　　But I go on for ever.






■ 30 THE WIND
　　Ro bert Louis Stevenson
　　I saw you toss the kites on high
　　And blow the birds about the sky;
　　And all around I heard you pass,
　　Like ladies' skirts across the grass—
　　O wind, a-blowing all day long,
　　O wind, that sings so loud a song !
　　I saw the different things you did,
　　But always you yourself you hid.
　　I felt you push, I heard you call,
　　I could not see yourself at all—
　　O wind, a-blowing all day long,
　　O wind, that sings so loud a song !
　　O you that are so strong and cold,
　　O blower, are you young or old

　　Are you a beast of field and tree,
　　Or just a stronger child than me 

　　O wind, a-blowing all day long,
　　O wind, that sings so loud a song !






■ 31 LOOKING-CLASS RIVER
　　Robert Louis Stevenson
　　Smooth it slides upon its travel,
　　Here a wimple, there a gleam— -
　　O the clean gravel !
　　O the smooth stream !
　　Sailing blossoms, silver fishes,
　　Paven pools as clear as air— -
　　How a child wishes
　　To live down there !
　　We can see our coloured faces
　　Floating on the shaken pool
　　Down in cool places,
　　Dim and very cool;
　　Till a wind or water wrinkle,
　　Dipping marten, plumping trout,
　　Spreads in a twinkle
　　And blots all out.
　　See the rings pursue each other;
　　All below grows black as night,
　　Just as if mother
　　Had blown out the light
　　Patience, children, just a minute
　　See the spreading circles die;
　　The stream and all in it
　　Will clear by-and-by






■ 32 THE SEASONS
　　Hilaire Belloc ①
　　They whom their mothers bare through Summer heat,
　　Are boys of Autumn, and a fruit complete.
　　They whom their mothers bare through April rain,
　　Are new as April, and as April vain.
　　They whom their mothers in dark Winters bare,
　　Wake to a barren world, and straight despair.
　　But they that held through Winter to the Spring
　　Despair as I do, and, as I do, sing.






■ 33 THE EARLY MORNING
　　Hilaire Belloc
　　The moon on the one hand, the dawn on the other:
　　The moon is my sister, the dawn is my brother.
　　The moon on my left and the dawn on my right.
　　My brother, good morning ! my sister, good night!






■ 34 THE SCARECROW
　　Walter de la Mare①
　　All winter through I bow my head
　　Beneath the driving rain;
　　The North wind powders me with snow
　　And blows me black again;
　　At midnight under a maze of stars
　　I flame with glittering rime,
　　And stand, above the stubble, stiff
　　As mail at morning-prime.
　　But when that child, called Spring, and all
　　His host of children, come,
　　Scattering their buds and dew upon
　　These acres of my home,
　　Some rapture in my rags awakes;
　　I lift void eyes and scan
　　The skies for crows, those ravening foes
　　Of my strange master, Man.
　　I watch him striding lank behind
　　His clashing team, and know
　　Soon will the wheat swish body high
　　Where once lay sterile snow;
　　Soon shall I gaze across a sea
　　Of sun-begotten grain,
　　Which my unflinching watch hath sealed
　　For harvest once again






■ 35 WIND ON THE HILL
　　A. A. Milne
　　No ore can tell me,
　　Nobody knows,
　　Where; the wind comes from,
　　Wherc the wind goes.
　　It's flying from somewhere
　　As fast as it can,
　　I couldn't keep up with it ,
　　Not if I ran.
　　But if I stopped holding
　　The string of my kite,
　　It would blow with the wind
　　For a day and a night.
　　And then when I found it,
　　Wherever it blew,
　　I should know that the wind
　　Had been. going there too.
　　So then I could tell them
　　where the wind goes …
　　But where the wind comes from
　　.Nobody knows.






■ 36 THE MIRROR
　　A. A. Milne
　　Between the woods the afternoon
　　Is fallen in a golden swoon,
　　The sun looks down from quiet skies
　　To where a quiet water lies,
　　And silent trees stoop down to trees.
　　And there I saw a white swan make
　　Another white swan in the lake;
　　And, breast to breast, both motionless,
　　They waited for the wind's caress
　　And all the water was at ease.






■ 37 DAFFODOWNDILLY
　　A. A. Milne
　　She wore her yellow sun-bonnet,
　　She wore her greenest gown;
　　She turned to the south wind
　　And curtsied up and down.
　　She turned to the sunlight
　　And shook her yellow head,
　　And whispered to her neighbour:
　　"Winter is dead."






■ 38 SPRING MORNING
　　A. A. Milne
　　Where am I going 
 I don't quite know.
　　Down to the stream where the king-cups grow —
　　Up on the hill where the pine-trees blow —
　　Anywhere, anywhere. I don't know.
　　Where am I going 
 The clouds sail by,
　　Little ones, baby ones, over the sky.
　　Where am I going 
 The shadows pass,
　　Little ones, baby ones, over the grass.
　　If you were a cloud, and sailed up there,
　　You'd sail on water as blue as air,
　　And you'd see me here in the fields and say:
　　"Doesn't the sky look green today
"
　　Where am I going
 The high rooks call:
　　"It's awful fun to be born at all. "
　　Where am I going
 The ring-doves coo:
　　"We do have beautiful things to do. "
　　If you were a bird, and lived on high,
　　You'd lean on the wind when the wind came by,
　　You'd say to the wind when it took you away:
　　"That's where I wanted to go today !"
　　Where am I going
 I don't quite know.
　　What does it matter where people go 

　　Down to the wood where the blue-bells grow —
　　Anywhere, anywhere. I don't know.









■ 39 THE DOG ANDTHE WATER-LILY
　　William Cowper ①
　　The noon was shady, and soft airs
　　Swept Ouse's silent tide,
　　When, 'scaped from literary cares,
　　I wander'd on his side.
　　My spaniel, prettiest of his race,
　　And high in pedigree,—
　　(Two nymphs adorn'd with every grace
　　That spaniel found for me,)
　　Now wanton'd lost in flags and reeds,
　　Now, starting into sight,
　　Pursucd the swallow o'er the meads.
　　With scarcc a slower flight.
　　It was the time when Ouse display'd
　　His lilies newly blown;
　　Their beauties I intent survey'd,
　　And one I wish'd my own.
　　With cane extended far I sought
　　To steer it close to land;
　　But still the prize, though nearly caught,
　　Escaped my eager hand.
　　Beau mark'd my unsuccessful pains
　　With fix'd considerate face,
　　And puzzling set his puppy brains
　　To comprehend the case.
　　But with a cherup clear and strong
　　Dispersing all his dream,
　　I thence withdrew, and follow'd long
　　The windings of the stream.
　　My ramble ended, I return'd;
　　Beau, trotting far before,
　　The floating wreath again discern'd,
　　And plunging left the shore.
　　I saw him with that lily cropp'd
　　Impatient swim to meet
　　My quick approach, and soon he dropp'd
　　The treasure at my feet.
　　Charm'd with the sight, ‘The world’, I cried
　　'Shall hear of this thy deed;
　　'My dog shall mortify the pride
　　'Of man's superior breed;
　　'But chief myself I will enjoin,
　　'Awake at duty's call,
　　'To show a love as prompt as thine
　　‘To Him who gives me all.’






■ 40 THE LAMB
　　William Blake
　　Little Lamb, who made thee

　　Dost thou know who made thee

　　Gave thee life, and bid thee feed,
　　By the stream, and o'er the mead;
　　Gave thee clothing of delight,
　　Softest clothing, wooly, bright;
　　Gave thee such a tender voice,
　　Making all the vales rejoice

　　Little Lamb, who made thee

　　Dost thou know who made thee

　　Little Lamb, I'll tell thee,
　　Little Lamb, I'll tell thee:
　　He is called by thy name,
　　For he calls himself a Lamb;
　　He is meek and he is mild,
　　He became a little child.
　　I a child, and thou a lamb,
　　We are called by his name.
　　Little Lamb, God bless thee,
　　Little Lamb, God bless thee.






■ 41 ANSWER TO ACHILD'S QUESTION
　　Samuel Taylor Coleridge①
　　Do you know what the birds say
 The Sparrow,the Dove,
　　The Linnet and Thrush say, "I love and I love! "
　　In the winter they're silent — the wind is so strong;
　　What it says, I don't know, but it sings a loud song.
　　But green leaves, and blossoms, and sunny warm weather,
　　And singing, and loving — all come back together.
　　But the Lark is so brimful of gladness and love,
　　The green fields below him, the blue sky above,
　　That he sings, and he sings, and for ever sings he —
　　"I love my Love and my Love loves me!"






■ 42 THE CHILD AND THE SNAKE
　　Mary Lamb ①
　　Henry was every morning fed
　　With a full mess of milk and bread.
　　One day the boy his breakfast took,
　　And ate it by a purling brook.
　　His mother lets him have his way.
　　With free leave Henry every day
　　Thither repairs, until she heard
　　Him talking of a fine gray bird.
　　This pretty bird, he said, indeed,
　　Came every day with him to feed;
　　And it loved him and loved his milk,
　　And it was smooth and soft like silk.
　　—On the next morn she follows Harry,
　　And carefully she sees him carry
　　Through the long grass his heap'd - up mess.
　　What was her terror and distress
　　When she saw the infant take
　　His bread and milk close to a snake!
　　Upon the grass he spreads his feast,
　　And sits down by his frightful guest,
　　Who had waited for the treat;
　　And now they both began to eat.
　　Fond mother! shriek not, O beware
　　The least small noise, O have a care —
　　The least small noise that may be made
　　The wily snake will be afraid—
　　If he hear the slightest sound,
　　He will inflict th'envenoan'd wound.
　　—She speaks not , moves not , scarce does breathe,
　　As she stands the trees beneath.
　　No sound she utters; and she soon
　　Sees the child lift up his spoon,
　　And tap the snake upon the head,
　　Fearless of harm; and then he said,
　　As speaking to familiar mate,
　　"Keep on your own side, do, Gray Pate;"
　　The snake then to the other side,
　　As one rebuked, seems to glide;
　　And now again advancing nigh,
　　Again she hears the infant cry,
　　Tapping the snake, "Keep further, do;
　　Mind , Gray Pate, what I say to you."
　　The danger's o'er! she sees the boy
　　(O what a change from fear to joy!)
　　Rise and bid the snake "Good-bye";
　　Says he, "Our breakfast's done, and I
　　Will come again to-morrow day";
　　—Then , lightly tripping, ran away.






■ 43 THE PARROTA True Story
　　Th omas Campbell①
　　The deep affections of the breast
　　That Heaven to living things imparts,
　　Are not exclusively possess'd
　　By human hearts.
　　A Parrot, from the Spanish main,
　　Full young and early caged came o'er,
　　With bright wings, to the bleak domain
　　Of Mulla's shore.
　　To spicy groves where he had won
　　His plumage of resplendent hue,
　　His native fruits, and skies, and sun,
　　He bade adieu.
　　For these he changed the smoke of turf,
　　A heathery land and misty sky,
　　And turn'd on rocks and raging surf
　　His golden eye.
　　But petted in our climate cold,
　　He lived and chatter'd many a day:
　　Until with age, from green and gold
　　His wings grew gray.
　　At last when blind, and seeming dumb,
　　He scolded, laugh'd, and spoke no more,
　　A Spanish stranger chanced to come
　　To Mulla's shore;
　　He hail'd the bird in Spanish speech,
　　The bird in Spanish speech replied;
　　Flapp'd round the cage with joyous screech,
　　Dropt down, and died.






■ 44 FLOWER IN THE CRANNIED WALL
　　Alf red Tennyson
　　Flower in the crannied wall,
　　I pluck you out of the crannies: —
　　Hold you here, root and all, in my hand,
　　Little flower—but if I could understand
　　What you are, root and all, and all in all,
　　I should know what God and man is.






■ 45 TO FLUSH, MY DOG
　　Elizabeth Barrett Browning ①
　　Loving friend, the gift of one,
　　Who, her own true faith, hath run.
　　Through thy lower nature;
　　Be my benediction said
　　With my hand upon thy head,
　　Gentle fellow-creature!
　　Like a lady's ringlets brown,
　　Flow thy silken ears adown
　　Either side demurely,
　　Of thy silver-suited breast
　　Shining out from all the rest
　　Of thy body purely.
　　Darkly brown thy body is,
　　Till the sunshine, striking this,
　　Alchemise its dulness,—
　　When the sleek curls manifold
　　Flash all over into gold,
　　With a burnished fulness.
　　Underneath my stroking hand,
　　Startled eyes of hazel bland
　　Kindling, growing larger,—
　　Up thou leapest with a spring,
　　Full of prank and curvetting,
　　Leaping like a charger.
　　Leap! thy broad tail waves a light;
　　Leap! thy slender feet are bright,
　　Canopied in fringes.
　　Leap — those tasselled ears of thine
　　Flicker strangely, fair and fine,
　　Down their golden inches.
　　Yet, my pretty sportive friend,
　　Little is't to such an end
　　That I praise thy rareness!
　　Other dogs may be thy peers
　　Haply in these drooping ears,
　　And this glossy fairness.
　　But of thee it shall be said,
　　This dog watched beside a bed
　　Day and night unweary,—
　　Watched within a curtained room,
　　Where no sunbeam brake the gloom
　　Round the sick and dreary.
　　Roses, gathered for a vase,
　　In that chamber died apace,
　　Beam and breeze resigning—
　　This dog only, waited on,
　　Knowing that when light is gone,
　　Love remains for shining.
　　Other dogs in thymy dew
　　Tracked the hares and followed through
　　Sunny moor or meadow—
　　This dog only, crept and crept
　　Next a languid cheek that slept,
　　Sharing in the shadow.
　　Other dogs of loyal cheer
　　Bounded at the whistle clear,
　　Up the woodside hieing—
　　This dog only, watched in reach
　　Of a faintly uttered speech,
　　Or a louder sighing.
　　And if one or two quick tears
　　Dropped upon his glossy ears,
　　Or a sigh came double,—
　　Up he sprang in eager haste,
　　Fawning, fondling, breathing fast,
　　In a tender trouble.
　　And this dog was satisfied,
　　If a pale thin hand would glide
　　Down his dewlaps sloping,—
　　Which he pushed his nose within,
　　After, — platforming his chin
　　On the palm left open.
　　This dog, if a friendly voice
　　Call him now to blyther choice
　　Than such chamber-keeping,
　　"Come out!" praying from the door,—
　　Presseth backward as before,
　　Up against me leaping.
　　Therefore to this dog will I,
　　Tenderly not scornfully,
　　Render praise and favour!
　　With my hand upon his head,
　　Is my benediction said
　　Therefore, and for ever.
　　And because he loves me so,
　　Better than his kind will do
　　Often, man or woman,—
　　Give I back more love again
　　Than dogs often take of men,—
　　Leaning from my Human.
　　Blessings on thee, dog of mine,
　　Pretty collars make thee fine,
　　Sugared milk make fat thee!
　　Pleasures wag on in thy tail—
　　Hands of gentle motion fail
　　Nevermore, to pat thee!
　　Downy pillow take thy head,
　　Silken coverlid bestead,
　　Sunshine help thy sleeping!
　　No fly's buzzing wake thee up—
　　No man break thy purple cup,
　　Set for drinking deep in.
　　Whiskered cats arointed flee—
　　Sturdy stoppers keep from thee
　　Cologne distillations;
　　Nuts lie in thy path for stones,
　　And thy feast-day macaroons
　　Turn to daily rations!
　　Mock I thee, in wishimg weal
—
　　Tears are in my eyes to feel
　　Thou art made so straightly,
　　Blessing needs must straighten too,—
　　Little canst thou joy or do,
　　Thou who lovest greatly.
　　Yet be blessed to the height
　　Of all good and all delight
　　Pervious to thy nature,—
　　Only loved beyond that line,
　　With a love that answers thine,
　　Loving fellow-creature!






■ 46 SEEDS
　　W alter de la Mare
　　The seeds I sowed—
　　For weeks unseen—
　　Have pushed up pygmy
　　Shoots of green;
　　So frail you'd think
　　The tiniest stone
　　Would never let
　　A glimpse be shown.
　　But no; a pebble
　　Near them lies,
　　At least a cherry-stone
　　In size,
　　Which that meresprout
　　Has heaved away,
　　To bask in sunshine,
　　See the Day.






■ 47 THE FLY
　　Walter de la Mare
　　How large unto the tiny fly
　　Must little things appear! —
　　A rosebud like a feather bed,
　　Its prickle like a spear;
　　A dewdrop like a looking-glass,
　　A hair like golden wire;
　　The smallest grain of mustard-seed
　　As fierce as coals of fire;
　　A loaf of bread, a lofty hill;
　　A wasp , a cruel leopard;
　　And specks of salt as bright to see
　　As lambkins to a shepherd.






■ 48 BRONWEN OF THE FLOWERS
　　Eleanor Farjeon①
　　Bronwen gathered wild-flowers
　　Up-and-down the lane;
　　Her gathering touch upon them.
　　Sweeter was than rain.
　　Now a blossom overblown,
　　Now a bud begun—
　　Her eye that lightened on them
　　Was quicker than the sun.
　　One by one she named them,
　　Oh, she did express
　　In her pretty namings
　　All their prettiness:
　　Some were fit for virgins,
　　Some for merry dames,
　　And the love with which she named them
　　Was lovelier than their names.






■ 49 WATER-LILIES
　　A.A.Milne
　　Where the water-lilies go
　　To and fro,
　　Rocking in the ripples of the water,
　　Lazy on a leaf lies the Lake King's daughter,
　　And the fait winds shake her.
　　Who will come and take her

　　I will! I will!
　　Keep still! Keep still!
　　Sleeping on a leaf lies the Lake King's daughter ...
　　Then the wind comes skipping
　　To the lilies on the water;
　　And the kind winds wake her.
　　Now who will take her

　　With a laugh she is slipping
　　Through the lilies on the water.
　　Wait! Wait!
　　Too late, too late!
　　Only the water-lilies go
　　To and fro,
　　Dipping, dipping,
　　To the ripples of the water.






■ 50 IN THE FASHION
　　A.A.Milne
　　A lion has a tail and a very fine tail,
　　And so has an elephant, and so has a whale,
　　And so has a crocodile, and so has a quail—
　　They've all got tails but me.
　　If I had sixpence I would buy one;
　　I'd say to the shopman, "Let me try one";
　　I'd say to the elephant, "This is my one."
　　They'd all come round to see.
　　Then I 'd say to the lion, "Why, you've got a tail!
　　And so has the elephant, and so has the whale!
　　And , look! There's a crocodile! He's got a tail!
　　You've all got tails like me!"






■ 51 BEEHIVE
　　Jean Too mer ①
　　Within this black hive to-night
　　There swarm a million bees;
　　Bees passing in and out the moon,
　　Bees .escaping out the moon,
　　Bees returning through the moon,
　　Silver bees intently buzzing,
　　Silver honey dripping from the swarm of bees;
　　Earth is a waxen cell of the world comb,
　　And I, a drone,
　　Lying on my back,
　　Lipping honey,
　　Getting drunk with silver honey,
　　Wish that I might fly out past the moon
　　And curl forever in some far-off farmyard flower.






■ 52 MY OWN TRUF FAMILY
　　Ted Hughes①
　　Once I crept in an oakwood — I was looking for a stag.
　　I met an old woman there — all knobbly stick and rag.
　　She said: "I have your secret here inside; my litte btag."
　　Then she began to cackle and I began to quake.
　　She opened up her little bag and I came twice awake —
　　Surrounded by a staring tribe and me tied to a stake.
　　They said: "We are the oak-trees and your own true family.
　　We are chopped down, we are torn up, you do not blink an eye.
　　Unless you make a promise now — now you are going to die.
　　Whenever you see an oak-tree felled, swear now you will plant two.
　　Unless you swear the black oak bark will wrinkle over you And root you among the oaks where you were born but never grew."
　　This was my dream beneath the boughs, the dream that altered me.
　　When I came out of the oakwood, back to human company,
　　My walk was the walk of a human child, but my heart was a tree.









■ 53 A SEA DIRGE
　　William Shakespeare
　　Full fathom five thy father lies;
　　Of his bones are coral made:
　　Those are pearls that were his eyes:
　　Nothing of him that doth fade,
　　But doth suffer a sea-change
　　Into something rich and strange.
　　Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell:
　　ding-dong.
　　Hark! now I hear them, — ding-dong, bell.






■ 54 INFANT JOY
　　William Blake
　　"I have no name;
　　I am but two days old."
　　What shall I call thee

　　"I happy am,
　　Joy is my name."
　　Sweet joy befall thee!
　　Pretty joy!
　　Sweet joy, but two days old.
　　Sweet joy I call thee;
　　Thou dost smile,
　　I sing the while;
　　Sweet joy befall thee!






■ 55 THE LITTLE BLACK BOY
　　William Blake
　　My mother bore me in the southern wild,
　　And I am black, but O! my soul is white;
　　White as an angel is the English child:
　　But I am black as if bereav'd of light.
　　My mother taught me underneath a tree,
　　And sitting down before the heat of day,
　　She took me on her lap and kissed me,
　　And pointing to the east began to say:
　　Look on the rising sun: there God does live
　　And gives his light, and gives his heat away.
　　And flowers and trees and beasts and men receive
　　Comfort in morning, joy in the noon day.
　　And we are put on earth a little space,
　　That we may learn to bear the beams of love,
　　And these black bodies and this sun-burnt face
　　Is but a cloud, and like a shady grove.
　　For when our souls have learn'd the heat to bear,
　　The cloud will vanish, we shall hear his voice,
　　Saying: come out from the grove, my love and care,
　　And round my golden tent like lambs rejoice.
　　Thus did my mother say and kissed me,
　　And thus I say to little English boy.
　　When I from black and he from white cloud free,
　　And round the tent of God like lambs we joy:
　　I'11 shade him from the heat till he can bear,
　　To lean in joy upon our father's knee.
　　And then I'll stand and stroke his silver hair,
　　And be like him and he will then love me.






■ 56 POOR MAILIE'S ELEGY
　　Robert Burns①
　　Lament in rhyme, lament in prose,
　　Wi' saut tears tricklin down your nose;
　　Our Bardie's fate is at a close,
　　Past a' remead!
　　The last, sad cape-stane of his woes;
　　Poor Mailie's dead!
　　It's no the loss of warl's gear,
　　That could sae bitter draw the tear,
　　Or mak our Bardie, dowie, wear
　　The mourning weed:
　　He's lost a friend an' neebor dear
　　In Mailie dead.
　　Thro' a' the town she trotted by him;
　　A lang half-mile she could descry him;
　　Wi' kindly bleat, when she did spy him,
　　She ran wi' speed:
　　A friend mair faithfu' ne'er cam nigh him,
　　Than Mailie dead.
　　I wat she was a sheep o'sense,
　　An' could behave hersel wi' mense:
　　I'll say 't, she never brak a fence,
　　Thro' thievish greed.
　　Our Bardie, lanely, keeps the spence
　　Sin' Mailie's dead.
　　Or; if he wanders up the howe,
　　Her livin image in her yowe
　　Comes bleatin till him, owre the knowe,
　　For bits o'bread;
　　An' down the briny pearls rowe
　　For Mailie dead.
　　She was nae get o'moorlan tips,
　　Wi' tawted ket, an' hairy hips;
　　For her forbears were brought in ships,
　　Frae 'yoiit the Tweed:
　　A bonier fleesh ne' er cross'd the clips
　　Than Mailie's dead.
　　Wae worth the man wha first did shape
　　That vile, wanchancie thing — a rape!
　　It maks guid fellows girn an' gape,
　　Wi' chokin dread;
　　An' Robin's bonnet wave wi' crape
　　For Mailie dead.
　　O a' ye bards on bonie Doon!
　　An' wha on Ayr your chanters tune!
　　Come, join the melancholious croon
　　O' Robin's reed!
　　His heart will never get aboon!
　　His Mailie's dead!






■ 57 WE ARE SEVEN
　　William Wordsworth
　　A simple Child,
　　That lightly draws its breath,
　　And feels its life in every limb,
　　What should it know of death

　　I met a little cottage Girl:
　　She was eight years old, she said;
　　Her hair was thick with many a curl
　　That clustered round her head.
　　She had a rustic, woodland air,
　　And she was wildly clad:
　　Her eyes were fair, and very fair;
　　— Her beauty made me glad.
　　"Sisters and brothers, little Maid,
　　How many may you be
"
　　"How many
 Seven in all,"she said,
　　And wondering looked at me.
　　"And where are they
 I pray you tell."
　　She answered, "Seven are we;
　　And two of us at Conway dwell,
　　And two are gone to sea.
　　"Two of us in the church-yard lie,
　　My sister and my brother;
　　And, in the church-yard cottage, I
　　Dwell near them with my mother."
　　"You say that two at Conway dwell,
　　And two are gone to sea,
　　Yes ye are seven!—I pray you tell,
　　Sweet Maid, how this may be."
　　Then did the little Maid reply,
　　"Seven boys and girls are we;
　　Two of us in the church-yard lie,
　　Beneath the church-yard tree."
　　"You run above, my little Maid,
　　Your limbs they are alive;
　　If two are in the church-yard laid,
　　Then ye are only five. "
　　"Their graves are green, they may be seen,"
　　The little Maid replied,
　　"Twelve steps or more from my mother's door,
　　And they are side by side.
　　"My stockings there I often knit,
　　My kerchief there I hem;
　　And there upon the ground I sit,
　　And sing a song to them.
　　"And often after sun-set, Sir,
　　When it is light and fair,
　　I take my little porringer,
　　And eat my supper there. "
　　"The first that died was sister Jane;
　　In bed she moaning lay,
　　Till God released her of her pain;
　　And then she went away.
　　"So in the church-yard she was laid;
　　And, when the grass was dry,
　　Together round her grave we played,
　　My brother John and I.
　　"And when the ground was white with snow,
　　And I could run and slide,
　　My brother John was forced to go,
　　And he lies by her side."
　　"How many are you, then," said I,
　　"If they two are in heaven
"
　　Quick was the little Maid's reply,
　　"O Master! We are seven."
　　"But they are dead; those two are dead!
　　Their spirits are in haven!"
　　Twas throwing words away, for still
　　The little Maid would have her will,
　　And said, "Nay, we are seven!"






■ 58 DESIDERIA
　　W illiam Wordsworth
　　Surprised by joy—impatient as the wind—
　　I turn'd to share the transport-O with whom
　　But Thee—deep buried in the silent tomb,
　　That spot which no vicissitude can find

　　Love, faithful love recall'd thee to my mind—
　　But how could I forget thee 
 Through what power
　　Even for the least division of an hour
　　Have I been so beguiled as to be blind
　　To my most grievous loss
 —That thought's return
　　Was the worst pang that sorrow ever bore,
　　Save one , one only, when I stood forlorn,
　　Knowing my heart's best treasure was no more;
　　That neither present time, nor years unborn
　　Could to my sight that heavenly face restore.






■ 59 LUCY GRAY Or, Solitude
　　William Wordsworth
　　Oft I had heard of Lucy Gray:
　　And, when I crossed the wild,
　　I chanced to see at break of day
　　The solitary child.
　　No mate, no comrade Lucy knew;
　　She dwelt on a wide moor,
　　—The sweetest thing that ever grew
　　Beside a human door!
　　You yet may spy the fawn at play,
　　The hare upon the green;
　　But the sweet face of Lucy Gray
　　Will never more be seen.
　　"To-night will be a stormy night—
　　You to the town must go.;
　　And take a lantem, Child, to light
　　Your mother throngh the snow. "
　　"That, Father! will I gladly do:
　　'Tis scarcely afternoon—
　　The minster-clock has just struck two,
　　And yonder is the moon!"
　　At. this the Father raised his hook,
　　And snapped a faggot-band;
　　He plied his work; —and Lucy took
　　The lantern in her hand.
　　Not blither is the mountain roe:
　　With many a wanton stroke
　　Her feet disperse the powdery snow,
　　That rises up like smoke.
　　The storm came on before its time:
　　She wandered up and down;
　　And many a hill did Lucy climb:
　　But never reached the town.
　　The wretched parents all that night
　　Went shouting far and wide;
　　But there was neither sound nor sight
　　To serve them for a guide
　　At day-break on a hill they stood
　　That overlooked the moor;
　　And thence they saw the bridge of wood,
　　A furlong from their door.
　　They wept —and, turning homeward, cried,
　　"In heaven we all shall meet;"
　　—When in the snow the mother spied
　　The print of Lucy' s feet.
　　Then downwards from the steep hill's edge
　　They tracked the footmarks small;
　　And through the broken hawthorn hedge,
　　And by the long stone-wall;
　　And then an open field they crossed:
　　The marks were still the same;
　　They tracked them on, nor ever lost;
　　And to. the bridge they came.
　　They followed from the snowy bank
　　Those footmarks, one by one,
　　Into the middle of the plank;
　　And further there were none!
　　—Yet some maintain that to this day
　　She is a living child;
　　That you may see sweet Lucy Gray
　　Upon the lonesome wild.
　　O'er rough and smooth she trips along,
　　And never looks behind;
　　And sings a solitary song
　　That whistles in the wind.






■ 60 "I HAD A DOVE"
　　John Keats
　　I had a dove, and the sweet dove died;
　　And I have thought it died of grieving:
　　O, what could it grieve for
 Its feet were tied
　　With a silken thread of my own hand's weaving.
　　Sweet little red feet! Why should you die

　　Why should you leave me, sweet bird
 Why

　　You lived alone in the forest-tree,
　　Why, pretty thing! would you not live with me

　　I kissed you oft and gave you white peas;
　　Why not live sweetly, as in the green trees







■ 61 THERE WAS A CHILD WENT FORTH
　　Walt Whitman
　　There was a child went forth every day,
　　And the first object he look' d upon, that object he became,
　　And that object became part of him for the day or a
　　certain part of the day,
　　Or for many years or stretching cycles of years.
　　The early lilacs became part of this child,
　　And grass and white and red morning- glories, and white
　　and red clover, and the song of the phoebe-bird,
　　And the Third- month lambs and the sow' s pink- faint
　　litter, and the mare's foal and the cow' s calf,
　　And the noisy brood of the barnyard or by the mire of the
　　pondside,
　　And the fish suspending themselves so curiously below
　　there, and the beautiful curious liquid,
　　And the water- plants with their graceful flat heads, all
　　became part of him.
　　The field- sprouts of Fourth month and fifth month
　　became part of him,
　　Winter- grain sprouts and those of the light -yellow corn,
　　and the esculent roots of the garden,
　　And the apple- trees cover' d with blossoms and the fruit
　　afterward, and wood- berries, and the commonest weeds
　　by the road,
　　And the old drunkard staggering home from the outhouse of
　　the tavern whence he had lately risen,
　　And the schoolmistress that pass' d on her way to the school,
　　And the friendly boys that pass' d and the quarrelsome boys,
　　And the tidy and fresh-cheek' d girls, and the barefoot negro
　　boy and girl,
　　And all the changes of city and country wherever he went.
　　His own parents, he that had father 'd him and she that had
　　conceiv' d him in her womb and birth' d him,
　　They gave this child more of themselves than that,
　　They gave him afterward every day, they became part of
　　him.
　　The mother at home quietly placing the dishes on the
　　suppertable,
　　The mother with mild words, clean her cap and gown, a
　　wholesome odor falling off her person and clothes as she
　　walks by,
　　The father, strong, self- sufficient, manly, mean, anger' d
　　unjust,
　　The blow, the quick loud word, the tight bargain, the crafty
　　lure,
　　The family usages, the language, the company, the
　　furniture, the yearning and swelling heart,
　　Affection that will not be gainsay' d ,the sense of what is real,
　　the thought if after all it should prove unreal,
　　The doubts of day-time and the doubts of night-time, the
　　curious whether and how,
　　Whether that which appears so is so, or is it all flashes and
　　specks

　　Men and women crowding fast in the streets, if they are not
　　flashes and specks what are they

　　The streets themselves and the facades of houses, and goods
　　in the windows,
　　Vehicles, teams, the heavy-plank' d wharves, the huge crossing
　　at the ferries,
　　The village on the highland seen from afar at sunset, the
　　river between,
　　Shadows, aureola and mist, the light falling on roofs and
　　gables of white or brown two miles off,
　　The schooner near by sleepily dropping down the tide, the
　　little boat slack-tow' d astern,
　　The hurrying tumbling waves, quick-broken crests, slapping,
　　The strata of color' d clouds, the long bar of maroon-tint
　　away solitary by itself, the spread of purity it lies motion
　　less in,
　　The horizon's edge, the flying sea-crow, the fragrance of
　　salt marsh and shore mud,
　　These became part of that child who went forth every day;
　　and who now goes, and will always go forth every day.






■ 62 ON THE BEACH AT NIGHT
　　Walt Whitman
　　On the beach at night,
　　Stands a child with her father,
　　Watching the east, the autumn sky.
　　Up through the darkness,
　　While ravening clouds, the burial clouds, in black masses
　　spreading, Lower sullen and fast athwart and down the
　　sky,
　　Amid a transparent clear belt of ether yet left in the
　　east,
　　Ascends large and calm the lord-star Jupiter,
　　And nigh at hand, only a very little above,
　　Swim the delicate sisters the Pleiades.
　　From the beach the child holding the hand of her father,
　　Those burial-clouds that lower victorious soon to devour
　　all,
　　Watching, silently weeps.
　　Weep not, child,
　　Weep not, my darling,
　　With these kisses let me remove your tears,
　　The ravening clouds shall not long be victorious,
　　They shall not long possess the sky, they devour the stars
　　only in apparition,
　　Jupiter shall emerge, be patient, watch again another
　　night,
　　the Pleiades shall emerge,
　　They are immortal, all those stars both silvery and golden
　　shall shine out again,
　　The great stars and the little ones shall shine out again,
　　they
　　endure,
　　The vast immortal suns and the long-enduring pensive
　　moons shall again shine.
　　Then dearest child mournest thou only for Jupiter

　　Considerest thou alone the burial of the stars

　　Something there is,
　　(With my lips soothing thee, adding I whisper,
　　I give thee the first suggestion, the problem and
　　indirection,)
　　Something there is more immortal even than the stars,
　　(Many the burials, many the days and nights, passing away,
　　)
　　Something that shall endure longer even than lustrous
　　Jupiter,
　　Longer than sun or any revolving satellite,
　　Or the radiant sisters the Pleiades.






■ 63 THE MOON UPON HER WATCH-TOWER
　　Eleanor Farjeon
　　The moon upon her watch-tower
　　With her golden eye
　　Guarded the quarters
　　East and West the sky.
　　Just as midnight
　　Was stepping past,
　　One drew his first breath,
　　One drew his last.
　　The moon upon her watch-tower
　　Rang a soundless bell—
　　It might have been for welcome,
　　It might have been farewell.






■ Ⅴ FAMILY·SOCIETY·MOTHERLAND·WORLD



■ 64 THE LITTLE BOY LOST
　　William Blake
　　Father, father, where are you going

　　O do not walk so fast.
　　Speak, father, speak to your little boy,
　　Or else I shall be lost.
　　The night was dark, no father was there,
　　The child was wet with dew.
　　The mire was deep, and the child did weep;
　　And away the vapour flew.






■ 65 THE LITTLE BOY FOUND
　　William Blake
　　The little boy lost in the lonely fen,
　　Led by the wand' ring light,
　　Began to cry, but God ever nigh,
　　Appeard like his father in white.
　　He kissed the child and by the hand led
　　And to his mother brought,
　　Who in sorrow pale, thro' the lonely dale
　　Her little boy weeping sought.






■ 66 THE CHIMNEY SWEEPER (1)
　　William Blake
　　When my mother died I was very young,
　　And my father sold me while yet my tongue
　　Could scarcely cry"weep weep weep weep!"
　　So your chimneys I sweep and in soot I sleep.
　　There's little Tom Dacre, who cried when his head
　　That curl' d like a lambs back, was shav' d, so I said,
　　"Hush, Tom never mind it, for when your head' s bare,
　　You know that the soot cannot spoil your white hair."
　　And so he was quiet, and that very night,
　　As Tom was a sleeping, he had such a sight,
　　That thousands of sweepers Dick, Joe, Ned and Jack
　　Were all of them lock' d up in coffins of black,
　　And by came an Angel who had a bright key,
　　And he open' d the coffins and set them all free.
　　Then down a green plain leaping laughing they run
　　And wash in a river and shine in the Sun.
　　Then naked and white, all their bags left behind,
　　They rise upon clouds, and sport in the wind.
　　And the Angel told Tom if he'd be a good boy,
　　He'd have God for his father and never want joy.
　　And so Tom awoke and we rose in the dark
　　And got with our bags and our brushes to work.
　　Tho' the morning was cold, Tom was happy and warm,
　　So if all do their duty, they need not fear harm.






■ 67 THE CHIMNEY SWEEPER (2)
　　William Blake
　　A little black thing among the snow,
　　Crying"weep, weep!" in notes of woe!
　　"Where are thy father and mother
 Say
"
　　"They are both gone up to the church to pray.
　　"Because I was happy upon the heath,
　　And smil' d among the winter's snow,
　　They clothed me in the clothes of death,
　　And taught me to sing the notes of woe.
　　"And because I am happy, and dance and sing,
　　They think they have done me no injury,
　　And are gone to praise God and his Priest and King
　　Who make up a heaven of our misery."






■ 68 ALICE FELL OR, POVERTY
　　William Wordsworth
　　The post-boy drove with fierce career,
　　For threatening clouds the moon had drowned;
　　When, as we hurried on, my ear
　　Was smitten with a startling sound.
　　As if the wind blew many ways,
　　I heard the sound, —and more and more;
　　It seemed to follow with the chaise,
　　And still I heard it as before.
　　At length I to the boy called out;
　　He stopped his horses at the word,
　　But neither cry, nor voice, nor shout,
　　Nor aught else like it, could be heard.
　　The boy then smacked his whip, and fast
　　The horses scampered through the rain;
　　But, hearing soon upon the blast
　　The cry, I bade him halt again.
　　Forthwith alighting on the ground,
　　"Whence comes," said I, "this piteous moan
"
　　And there a little Girl I found,
　　Sitting behind the chaise, alone.
　　"My cloak!" no other word she spake,
　　But loud and bitterly she wept,
　　As if her innocent heart would break;
　　And down from off her seat she leapt.
　　"What ails you, child
" —she sobbed "Look here!"
　　I saw it in the wheel entangled,
　　A weather-beaten rag as e' er
　　From any garden scare-crow dangled.
　　There, twisted between nave and spoke,
　　It hung, nor could at once be freed;
　　But our joint pains unloosed the cloak,
　　A miserable rag indeed!
　　"And whither are you going, child,
　　To-night along these lonesome ways
"
　　"To Durham," answered she, half wild—
　　"Then come with me into the chaise."
　　Insensible to all relief
　　Sat the poor girl, and forth did send
　　Sob after sob, as if her grief
　　Could never, never have an end.
　　"My child, in Durham do you dwell
"
　　She checked herself in her distress,
　　And said, "My name is Alice Fell;
　　I'm fatherless and motherless.
　　And I to Durham, Sir, belong."
　　Again, as if the thought would choke
　　Her very heart, her grief grew strong;
　　And all was for her tattered cloak!
　　The chaise drove on; our journey's end
　　Was nigh; and, sitting by my side,
　　As if she had lost her only friend
　　She wept, nor would be pacified.
　　Up to the tavern-door we post;
　　Of Alice and her grief I told;
　　And I gave money to the host,
　　To buy a new cloak for the old.
　　"And let it be of duffil grey,
　　As warm a cloak as man can sell!"
　　Proud creature was she the next day,
　　The little orphan, Alice Fell!






■ 69 PATRIOTISM
　　Walter Scott①
　　Breathes there the man with soul so dead,
　　Who never to himself hath said,
　　"This is my own, my native land!"
　　Whose heart hath ne'er within him burn' d
　　As home his footsteps he hath turn' d
　　From wandering on a foreign strand

　　If such there breathe, go, mark him well;
　　For him no Minstrel raptures swell;
　　High though his titles, proud his name,
　　Boundless his wealth as wish can claim;
　　Despite those titles, power and pelf,
　　The wretch, concentred all in self,
　　Living, shall forfeit fair renown,
　　And, doubly dying, shall go down
　　To the vile dust from whence he sprung,
　　Unwept, unhonour'd and unsung.






■ 70 AFTER BLENHEIM
　　Robe rt Southey①
　　It was a summer evening,
　　Old Kaspar's work was done,
　　And he before his cottage door
　　Was sitting in the sun;
　　And by him sported on the green
　　His little grandchild Wilhelmine.
　　She saw her brother Peterkin
　　Roll something large and round
　　Which he beside the rivulet
　　In playing there had found;
　　He came to ask what he had found
　　That was so large and smooth and round.
　　Old Kaspar took it from the boy
　　Who stood expectant by;
　　And then the old man shook his head,
　　And with a natural sigh
　　"Tis some poor fellow's skull," said he,
　　"Who fell in the great victory.
　　"I find them in the garden,
　　For there's many here about;
　　And often when I go to plough
　　The ploughshare turns them out.
　　For many thousand men," said he,
　　"Were slain in that great victory."
　　"Now tell us what 'twas all about,"
　　Young Peterkin he cries;
　　And little Wilhelmine looks up
　　With wonder-waiting eyes;
　　"Now tell us all about the war,
　　And what they fought each other for."
　　"It was the English," Kaspar cried,
　　"Who put the French to rout;
　　But what they fought each other for
　　I could not well make out.
　　But everybody said," quoth he,
　　"That 'twas a famous victory.
　　"My father lived at Blenheim then,
　　Yon little stream hard by;
　　They burnt his dwelling to the ground,
　　And he was forced to fly:
　　So with his wife and child he fled,
　　Nor had he where to rest his head.
　　"With fire and sword the country round
　　Was wasted far and wide,
　　And many a childing mother then
　　And new-born baby died:
　　But things like that, you know, must be
　　At every famous victory.
　　"They say it was a shocking sight
　　After the field was won;
　　For many thousand bodies here
　　Lay rotting in the sun:
　　But things like that, you know, must be
　　After a famous victory.
　　"Great praise the Duke of Marlbro' won
　　And our good Prince Eugene";
　　"Why, 'twas a very wicked thing!"
　　Said little Wilhelmine;
　　"Nay.. nay.. my little girl," quoth he,
　　"It was a famous victory.
　　"And everybody praised the Duke
　　Who this great fight did win."
　　"But what good came of it at last
"
　　Quoth little .Peterkin:—
　　"Why, that I cannot tell," said he,
　　"But 'twas a famous victory."






■ 71 TO IANTHE
　　Percy Byssh e Shelley①
　　I love thee, Baby! for thine own sweet sake;
　　Those azure eyes, that faintly dimpled cheek,
　　Thy tender frame, so eloquently weak,
　　Love in the sternest heart of hate might wake;
　　But more when o'er thy fitful slumber bending
　　Thy mother folds thee to her wakeful heart,
　　Whilst love and pity, in her glances blending,
　　All that thy passive eyes can feel impart:
　　More, when some feeble lineaments of her,
　　Who bore thy weight beneath her spotless bosom,
　　As with deep love I read thy face, recur,—
　　More dear art thou, O fair and fragile blossom;
　　Dearest when most thy tender traits express
　　The image of thy mother's loveliness.






■ 72 ON MY MOTHER'S BIRTHDAY
　　WRITTEN AT THE AGE OF EI GHT
　　Felicia Dorothea Hemans①
　　Clad in all their brightest green,
　　This day the verdant fields are seen;
　　The tuneful birds begin their lay,
　　To celebrate thy natal day.
　　The breeze is still, the sea is calm,
　　And the whole scene combines to charm;
　　The flowers revive, this charming May,
　　Because it is thy natal day.
　　The sky is blue, the day serene,
　　And only pleasure now is seen;
　　The rose, the pink, the tulip gay,
　　Combine to bless thy natal day.






■ 73 CASABIANCA
　　F elicia Dorothea Hemans
　　The boy stood on the burning deck
　　Whence all but he had fled;
　　The flame that lit the battle's wreck
　　Shone round him o'er the dead.
　　Yet beautiful and bright he stood,
　　As born to rule the storm—-
　　A creature of heroic blood,
　　A proud, though child-like form.
　　The flames roll' d on—he would not go
　　Without his father's word;
　　That father, faint in death below,
　　His voice no longer heard.
　　He call' d aloud: — "Say, father! say
　　If yet my task is done!"
　　He knew not that the chieftain lay
　　Unconscious of his son.
　　"Speak, father!" once again he cried,
　　"If I may yet be gone!"
　　And but the booming shots replied,
　　And fast the flames roll' d on.
　　Upon his brow he felt their breath,
　　And in his waving hair,
　　And look' d from that lone post of death
　　In still yet brave despair;
　　And shouted but once more aloud,
　　"My father! must I stay
"
　　While o'er him fast, through sail and shroud,
　　The wreathing fires made way.
　　They wrapt the ship in splendour wild,
　　They caught the flag on high,
　　And stream' d above the gallant child
　　Like banners in the sky.
　　There came a burst of thunder-sound—
　　The boy—oh! where was he

　　Ask of the winds that far around
　　With fragments strew' d the sea! -
　　With mast, and helm, and pennon fair,
　　That well had borne their part;
　　But the noblest thing which perish' d there
　　Was that young faithful heart!






■ 74 THE MITHERLESS BAIRN
　　William Thom①
　　Whena' ither bairnies are hushed to their hame,
　　By aunty or cousin, or frecky grand-dame,
　　Wha stans last and lanely, an' naebody carin'

　　'Tis the puir doited loonie—the mitherless bairn.
　　The mitherless bairn gangs till his lane bed,
　　Nane covers his cauld back, or haps his bare head;
　　His wee hack it heelies are hard as the airn,
　　An' litheless the lair o' the mitherless bairn.
　　O speak him nae harshly—he trembles the while,
　　He bends to your bidding, and blesses your smile!
　　In their dark hour o' anguish the heartless shall learn
　　That God deals the blow for the mitherless bairn.






■ 75 THE CRY OF THE CHILDREN
　　Elizabeth Barrett Browning
　　Ⅰ
　　Do ye hear the children weeping, O my brothers,
　　Ere the sorrow comes with years

　　They are leaning their young heads against their mothers,
　　And that cannot stop their tears.
　　The young lambs are bleating in the meadows,
　　The young birds are chirping in the nest,
　　The young fawns are playing with the shadows,
　　The young flowers are blowing toward the west—
　　But the young, young children, O my brothers,
　　They are weeping bitterly!
　　They are weeping in the playtime of the others,
　　In the country of the free.
　　Ⅱ
　　Do you question the young children in the sorrow,
　　Why their tears are falling so

　　The old man may weep for his to-morrow
　　Which is lost in Long Ago；
　　The old tree is leafless in the forest,
　　The old year is ending in the frost,
　　The old wound, if stricken, is the sorest,
　　The old hope is hardest to be lost.
　　But the young, young children, O my brothers,
　　Do you ask them why they stand
　　Weeping sore before the bosoms of their mothers,
　　In our happy Fatherland

　　Ⅲ
　　They look up with their pale and sunken faces,
　　And their looks are sad to see,
　　For the man's hoary anguish draws and presses
　　Down the cheeks of infancy.
　　‘Your old earth,’ they say, ‘is very dreary;
　　Our young feet,’ they say, ‘are very weak!
　　Few paces have we taken, yet are weary—-
　　Our grave-rest is very far to seek.
　　Ask the aged why they weep, and not the children;
　　For the outside earth is cold;
　　And we young ones stand without, in our bewildering,
　　And the graves are for the old.’
　　Ⅳ
　　‘True,’ say the children, ‘it may happen
　　That we die before our time;
　　Little Alice died last year—her grave is shapen
　　Like a snowball, in the rime.
　　We looked into the pit prepared to take her:
　　Was no room for any work in the close clay!
　　From the sleep wherein she lieth none will wake her,
　　Crying, "Get up, little Alice! it is day."
　　If you listen by that grave, in sun and shower,
　　With your ear down, little Alice never cries;
　　Could we see her face, be sure we should not know her,
　　For the smile has time for growing in her eyes:
　　And merry go her moments, lulled and stilled in
　　The shroud by the kirk-chime!
　　It is good when it happens,’ say the children,
　　‘That we die before our time.’
　　Ⅴ
　　Alas, alas, the children! they are seeking
　　Death in life, as best to have;
　　They are binding up their hearts away from breaking,
　　With a cerement from the grave.
　　Go out, children, from the mine and from the city,
　　Sing out, children, as the little thrushes do;
　　Pluck you handfuls of the meadow cowslips pretty,
　　Laugh aloud, to feel your fingers let them through!
　　But they answer, ‘Are your cowslips of the méadows
　　Like our weeds anear the mine

　　Leave us quiet in the dark of the coal-shadows,
　　From your pleasures fair and fine!
　　Ⅵ
　　‘For oh,’ say the children, ‘we are weary,
　　And we cannot run or leap;
　　If we cared for any meadows, it were merely
　　To drop down in them and sleep.
　　Our knees tremble sorely in the stooping,
　　We fall upon our faces, trying to go;
　　And, underneath our heavy eyelids drooping,
　　The reddest flower would look as pale as snow;
　　For, all day, we drag our burden tiring
　　Through the coal-dark, underground—
　　Or, all day, we drive the wheels of iron
　　In the factories, round and round.
　　Ⅶ
　　‘For, all day, the wheels are droning, turning,—
　　Their wind comes in our faces,—
　　Till our hearts turn,—our heads with pulses burning,
　　And the walls turn in their places:
　　Turns the sky in the high window blank and reeling,
　　Turns the long light that drops adown the wall,
　　Turn the black flies that crawl along the ceiling,
　　All are turning, all the day, and we with all.
　　And all day, the iron wheels are droning,
　　And sometimes we could pray,
　　"O ye wheels" (breaking out in a mad moaning),
　　"Stop! be silent for to-day!"’
　　Ⅷ
　　Ay! be silent! Let them hear each other breathing
　　For a moment, mouth to mouth!
　　Let them touch each other's hands, in a fresh wreathing
　　Of their tender human youth!
　　Let them feel that this cold metallic motion
　　Is not all the life God fashions or reveals:
　　Let them prove their living souls against the notion
　　That they live in you, or under you, O wheels! —
　　Still, all day, the iron wheels go onward,
　　Grinding life down from its mark;
　　And the children's souls, which God is calling sunward,
　　Spin on blindly in the dark.
　　Ⅸ
　　Now tell the poor young children, O my brothers,
　　To look up to Him and pray;
　　So the blessed One who blesseth all the others,
　　Will bless them another day.
　　They answer, ‘Who is God that He should hear us,
　　While the rushing of the iron wheels is stirred

　　When we sob aloud, the human creatures near us
　　Pass by, hearing not, or answer not a word.
　　And we hear not (for the wheels in their resounding)
　　Strangers speaking at the door.
　　Is it likely God, with angels singing round Him,
　　Hears our weeping any more

　　Ⅹ
　　‘Two words, indeed, of praying we remember,
　　And at midnight's hour of harm,
　　"Our Father," looking upward in the chamber,
　　We say softly for a charm.
　　We know no other words, except"Our Father,"
　　And we think that, in some pause of angels' song,
　　God may pluck them with the silence sweet to gather,
　　And hold both within His right hand which is strong.
　　"Our Father!" If He heard us, He would surely
　　(For they call Him good .and mild)
　　Answer, smiling down the steep world very purely,
　　"Come and rest with Me, My child."
　　Ⅺ
　　‘But, no!’ say the children, weeping faster,
　　‘He is speechless as a stone;
　　And they tell us, of His image is the master
　　Who commands us to work on.
　　Go to!’ say the children, — ‘up in Heaven,
　　Dark, wheel-like, turning clouds are all we find.
　　Do not mock us; grief has made us unbelieving—
　　We look up for God, but tears have made us blind.’
　　Do you hear the children weeping and disproving,
　　O my brothers, what ye preach

　　For God's possible is taught by His world's loving,
　　And the children doubt of each.
　　Ⅻ
　　And well may the children weep before you!
　　They are weary ere they run;
　　They have never seen the sunshine, nor the glory
　　Which is brighter than the sun.
　　They know the grief of man, without its wisdom;
　　They sink in man's despair, without its calm;
　　Are slaves, without the liberty in Christdom,
　　Are martyrs, by the pang without the palm,—
　　Are worn, as if with age, yet unretrievingly
　　The harvest of its memories cannot reap,—
　　Are orphans of the earthly love and heavenly.
　　Let them weep! let them weep!
　　ⅩⅢ
　　They look up, with their pale and sunken faces,
　　And their look is dread to see,
　　For they mind you of their angels in high places,
　　With eyes turned on Deity!—
　　‘Haw long,’ they say, ‘how long, O cruel nation,
　　Will you stand, to move the world, on a child's heart, —
　　Stifle down with a mailed heel its palpitation,
　　And tread onward to your throne amid the mart

　　Our blood splashes upward, O gold-heaper,
　　And your purple shows your path!
　　But the child's sob in the silence curses deeper
　　Than the strong man in his wrath.’






■ 76 THE CHILDREN'S HOUR
　　Henry Wadsworth Long fellow
　　Between the dark and the daylight,
　　When the night is beginning to lower,
　　Comes a pause in the day's occupations,
　　That is known as the Children's Hour.
　　I hear in the chamber above me
　　The patter of little feet,
　　The sound of a door that is opened,
　　And voices soft and sweet.
　　From my study I see in the lamplight,
　　Descending the broad hall stair,
　　Grave Alice, and laughing Allegra,
　　And Edith with golden hair.
　　A whisper, and then a silence:
　　Yet I know by their merry eyes
　　They are plotting and planning together
　　To take me by surprise.
　　A sudden rush from the stairway,
　　A sudden raid from the hall!
　　By three doors left unguarded
　　They enter my castle wall!
　　They climb up into my turret
　　O'er the arms and back of my chair;
　　If I try to escape they surround me;
　　They seem to be everywhere.
　　They almost devour me with kisses,
　　Their arms about me entwine,
　　Till I think of the Bishop of Bingen
　　In his Mouse-Tower on the Rhine!
　　Do you think, O blue-eyed banditti,
　　Because you have scaled the wall,
　　Such an old mustache as I am
　　Is not a match for you all!
　　I have you fast in my fortress,
　　And will not let you depart,
　　But put you down into the dungeon
　　In the round-tower of my heart.
　　And there will I keep you for ever
　　Yes, for ever and a day,
　　Till the walls shall crumble to ruin,
　　And moulder in dust away!






■ 77 BABY SONG
　　Alf red Tennyson
　　What does little birdie say
　　In her nest at peep of day

　　Let me fly, says little birdie,
　　Mother, let me fly away.
　　Birdie, rest a little longer,
　　Till the little wings are stronger.
　　So she rests a little longer,
　　Then she flies away.
　　What does little baby say
　　In her bed at peep of day

　　Baby says, like little birdie,
　　Let me rise and fly away.
　　Baby, sleep a little longer,
　　Till the little limbs are stronger.
　　If she sleeps a little longer,
　　Baby too shall fly away.






■ 78 THE SANDS OF DEE
　　Char les Kingsley①
　　"O Mary, go and call the cattle home,
　　And call the cattle home,
　　And call the cattle home
　　Across the sands of Dee"
　　The western wind was wild and dank with foam,
　　And all alone went she.
　　The western tide crept up along the sand,
　　And o' er and o' er the sand,
　　And round and round the sand,
　　As far as eye could see.
　　The rolling mist came down and hid the land:
　　And never home came she.
　　"Oh! is it weed, or fish, or floating hair—
　　A tress of golden hair,
　　A drowned maiden's hair
　　Above the nets at sea

　　Was never salmon yet that shone so fair
　　Among the stakes on Dee."
　　They rowed her in across the rolling foam,
　　The cruel crawling foam,
　　The cruel hungry foam,
　　To her grave beside the sea:
　　But still the boatmen hear her call the cattle home
　　Across the sands of Dee.






■ 79 MOTHER AND BABE
　　Walt Whitman
　　I see the sleeping babe nestling the breast of its mother,
　　The sleeping mother and babe—hush'd, I study
　　them long and long.






■ 80 GREAT, WIDE, BEAUTIFUL,
　　WONDERFUL WORLD
　　Willaim Brighty Rands①
　　Great, Wide, beautiful, wonderful world,
　　With the wonderful water round you curled,
　　And the wonderful grass upon your breast—
　　World, you are beautifully drest.
　　The wonderful air is over me,
　　And the wonderful wind is shaking the tree;
　　It walks on the water, and whirls the mills,
　　And talks to itself on the tops of the hills.
　　You friendly earth! how far do you go,
　　With the wheat-fields that nod and the rivers that flow,
　　With cities and gardens, and cliffs, and isles,
　　And people upon you for thousands of miles

　　Ah, you are so great and I am so small,
　　I tremble to think of you, World, at all;
　　And yet, when I said my prayers to-day,
　　A Whisper inside me seemed to say,
　　"You are more than the earth, though you are such a dot:
　　You can love and think, and the earth cannot!"






■ 81 THE TOYS
　　Coventry P atmore①
　　My little Son, who look'd from thoughtful eyes
　　And moved and spoke in quiet grown-up wise,
　　Having my law the seventh time disobey'd,
　　I struck him, and dismiss'd
　　With hard words and unkiss'd,
　　—His Mother, who was patient, being dead.
　　Then, fearing lest his grief should hinder sleep,
　　I visited his bed,
　　But found him slumbering deep,
　　With darken'd eyelids, and their lashes yet
　　From his late sobbing wet.
　　And I, with moan,
　　Kissing away his tears, left others of my own;
　　For, on a table drawn beside his head,
　　He had put, within his reach,
　　A box of counters and a red-vein a stone,
　　A piece of glass abraded by the beach,
　　And six or seven shells,
　　A bottle with bluebells,
　　And two French copper coins, ranged there with careful art,
　　To comfort his sad heart.
　　So when that night I pray'd
　　To God, I wept, and said:
　　"Ah, when at last we lie with tranced breath,
　　Not vexing Thee in death,
　　And Thou rememberest of what toys
　　We made our joys,
　　How weakly understood
　　Thy great commanded good,
　　Then, fatherly not less
　　Than I whom Thou has moulded from the clay,
　　Thou'lt leave Thy wrath, and say,
　　‘I will be sorry for their childishness.’"






■ 82 THE LAMPLIGHTER
　　Robert Louis Stevenson
　　My tea is nearly ready and the sun has left the sky;
　　It's time to take the window to see Leerie going by;
　　For every night at tea-time and before you take your seat,
　　With lantern and with ladder he comes posting up the street.
　　Now Tom would be a driver and Maria go to sea,
　　And my papa's a banker and as rich as he can be;
　　But I, when I am stronger and can choose what I'm to do,
　　O Leerie, I'll go round at night and light the lamps with you!
　　For we are very lucky, with a lamp before the door,
　　And Leerie stops to light it as he lights so many more;
　　And O! before you hurry by with ladder and with light,
　　O Leerie, see a little child and nod to him to-night!






■ 83 TO A CHILD DANCING IN THE WIND
　　William Butler Yeats①
　　Dance there upon the shore;
　　What need have you to care
　　For wind or water's roar

　　And tumble out your hair
　　That the salt drops have wet;
　　Being young you have not known
　　The fool's triumph, nor yet
　　Love lost as soon as won,
　　Nor the best labourer dead
　　And all the sheaves to bind.
　　What need have you to dread
　　The monstrous crying of wind







■ 84 IN THE CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL
　　Hugh MacDiarmid①
　　"Does it matter
 Losing your legs
"
　　Siegfried Sassoon
　　Now let the legless boy show the great lady
　　How well he can manage his crutches.
　　It doesn't matter though the Sister objects,
　　"He's not used to them yet,"when such is
　　The will of the Princess. Come, Tommy,
　　Try a few desperate steps through the ward.
　　Then the hand of Royalty will pat your head
　　And life suddenly cease to be hard.
　　For a couple of legs are surely no miss
　　When the loss leads to such an honour as this!
　　One knows, when one sees how j ealous the rest
　　Of the children are, it's been all for the best! —
　　But would the sound of your sticks on the floor
　　Thundered in her skull for evermore!









■ 85 ON A FAVOURITE CAT, DROWNEDIN A TUB OF GOLDFISHES
　　Thomas Gray①
　　’Twas on a lofty vase's side,
　　Where China's gayest art had dyed
　　The azure flowers that blow,
　　Demurest of the tabby kind,
　　The pensive Selima, reclined,
　　Gazed on the lake below
　　Her conscious tail her joy declared:
　　The fair round face, the snowy beard,
　　The velvet of her paws,
　　Her coat that with the tortoise vies,
　　Her ears of j et, and emerald eyes,
　　She saw; and purr'd applause.
　　Still had she gazed, but'midst the tide
　　Two angel forms were seen to glide,
　　The Genii of the stream:
　　Their scaly armour's Tyrian hue
　　Through richest purple to the view
　　Betray'd a golden gleam.
　　The hapless Nymph with wonder saw:
　　A whisker first, and then a claw
　　With many an ardent wish
　　She stretch'd, in vain, to reach the prize——
　　What female heart can gold despise

　　What Cat's averse to Fish

　　Presumptuous maid! with looks intent
　　Again she stretch'd, again she bent,
　　Nor knew the gulf between—
　　Malignant Fate sat by and smiled—
　　The slippery verge her feet beguiled;
　　She tumbled headlong in!
　　Eight times emerging from the flood
　　She mew'd to every watery God
　　Some speedy aid to send:—
　　No Dolphin came, no Nereid stirr'd,
　　Nor cruel Tom nor Susan heard—
　　A favourite has no friend!
　　From hence, ye Beauties, undeceived,
　　Know one false step is ne'er retrieved,
　　And be with caution bold:
　　Not all that tempts your wandering eyes
　　And heedless hearts, is lawful prize,
　　Nor all that glisters, gold!






■ 86 TO A CHILD Written in her album
　　William Wordsworth
　　Small service is true service while it lasts.
　　Of humblest Friends, bright Creature! scorn not one;
　　The Daisy, by the shadow that it casts,
　　Protects the lingering dew-drop from the Sun.






■ 87 MEDDLESOME MATTY
　　Ann Taylor①
　　O How one ugly trick has spoiled
　　The sweetest and the best!
　　Matilda, though a pleasant child,
　　One ugly trick possessed,
　　Which like a cloud before the skies
　　Hid all her better qualities.
　　Sometimes she'd lift the teapot lid,
　　To peep at what was in it,
　　Or tilt the kettle, if you did
　　But turn your back a minute;
　　In vain you told her not to touch,
　　Her trick of meddling grew so much.
　　Her Grandmamma went out one day,
　　And by mistake she laid
　　Her spectacles and snuff-box gay
　　Too near the little maid.
　　‘Ah! well,’thought she,‘I'll try them on,
　　As soon as Grandmamma is gone.’
　　Forthwith she placed upon her nose
　　The glasses large and wide;
　　And looking round, as I suppose,
　　The snuff-box too she spied.
　　‘O what a pretty box is this!
　　I'll open it,’said little Miss.
　　‘I know that Grandmamma would say
　　"Don't meddle with it, dear";
　　But then she's far enough away,
　　And no one else is near;
　　Beside, what can there be amiss
　　In opening such a box as this
’
　　So thumb and finger went to work
　　To move the stubborn lid,
　　And presently a mighty jerk
　　The mighty mischief did;
　　For all at once, ah, woeful case!
　　The snuff came puffing in her face.
　　Poor eyes, poor nose, poor mouth and chin
　　A dismal sight presented;
　　And as the snuff got further in,
　　Sincerely she repented;
　　In vain she ran about for ease,
　　She could do nothing else but sneeze.
　　She dashed the spectacles away,
　　To wipe her tingling eyes,
　　And as in twenty bits they lay,
　　Her Grandmamma she spies;
　　‘Heyday! and what's the matter now
’
　　Cried Grandmamma, with lifted brow
　　Matilda, smarting with the pain,
　　And tingling still and sore,
　　Made many a promise to refrain
　　From ever meddling more;
　　And'tis a fact, as I have heard,
　　She ever since has kept her word.






■ 88 TODAY
　　Thomas Car lyle①
　　So here hath been dawning
　　Another blue day:
　　Think, wilt thou let it
　　Slip useless away

　　Out of eternity
　　This new day is born;
　　into eternity
　　At night doth return.
　　Behold it aforetime
　　No eye ever did:
　　So soon it for ever
　　From all eyes is hid.
　　Here hath been dawning
　　Another blue day:
　　Think, wilt thou let it
　　slip useless away







■ 89 DEDICATION ON THE GIFTOF A BOOK TO A CHILD
　　Hilaire Belloc
　　Child! do not throw this book about!
　　Refrain from the unholy pleasure
　　Of cutting all the pictures out!
　　Preserve it as your chiefest treasure.
　　Child, have you never heard it said
　　That you are heir to all the ages

　　Why, then, your hands were never made
　　To tear these beautiful thick pages!
　　Your little hands were made to take
　　The better things and leave the worse ones;
　　They also may be used to shake
　　The Massive Paws of Elder Persons.
　　And when your prayers complete the day,
　　Darling, your little tiny hands
　　Were also made, I think, to pray
　　For men that lose their fairylands.






■ 90 DEDICATION OF A CHILD'S BOOK OF IMAGINARY TALES
　　Hilaire Belloc
　　WHEREIN WRONG-DOERS SUFFER
　　And is it true
 It is not true!
　　And if it was it wouldn't do
　　For people such as me and you,
　　Who very nearly all day long
　　Are doing something rather wrong.






■ 91 A PLEA TO BOYS AND GIRLS
　　Robert Graves①
　　You learned Lear's Nonsense Rhymes by heart,
　　not rote;
　　You learned Pope's Iliad by rote, not heart;
　　These terms should be distinguished if you quote
　　My verses, children—keep them poles apart—
　　And call the man a liar who says I wrote
　　All that I wrote in love, for love of art.









■ 92 TIME, REAL AND IMAGIN ARY AN ALLEGORY
　　Samuel Taylor Colerige
　　On the wide level of a mountain's head,
　　(I knew not where, but twas some faery place)
　　Their pinions, ostrich-like, for sails outspread,
　　Two lovely children run an endless race,
　　A sister and a brother!
　　That far outstripp'd the other;
　　Yet ever runs she with reverted face,
　　And looks and listens for the boy behind:
　　For he, alas! is blind!
　　O'er rough and smooth with even step he pass'd,
　　And knows not whether he be first or last.






■ 93 SOMETHING CHILDISH, BUT VERY NATURAL
　　Samuel Taylor Coleridge
　　If I had but two little wings,
　　And were a little feathery bird,
　　To you I'd fly, my dear!
　　But thoughts like these are idle things,
　　And I stay here.
　　But in my sleep to you I fly:
　　I'm always with you in my sleep!
　　The world is all one's own.
　　But then one wakes, and where am I

　　All, all alone.
　　Sleep stays not, though a monarch bids:
　　So I love to wake ere break of day:
　　For though my sleep be gone,
　　Yet while'tis dark, one shuts one's lids,
　　And still dreams on.






■ 94 THE OWL AND THE PUSSY-CAT
　　Edward Lear①
　　The OWl and the Pussy-Cat went to sea
　　In a beautiful pea-green boat:
　　They took some honey, and plenty of money
　　Wrapped up in a five-pound note.
　　The Owl looked up to the stars above,
　　And sang to a small guitar,
　　"O lovely Pussy, O Pussy, my love,
　　What a beautiful Pussy you are,
　　You are,
　　You are!
　　What a beautiful Pussy you are!"
　　Pussy said to the Owl,"You elegant fowl,
　　How charmingly sweet you sing!
　　Oh! let us be married; too long we have tarried:
　　But what shall we do for a ring
"
　　They sailed away, for a year and a day,
　　To the land where the bong-tree grows;
　　And there in a wood a Piggy-wig stood,
　　With a ring at the end of his nose,
　　His nose,
　　His nose,
　　With a ring at the end of his nose.
　　"Dear Pig, are you willing to sell for one shilling
　　Your ring
"Said the Piggy,"I will."
　　So they took it away, and were married next day
　　By the Turkey who lives on the hill.
　　They dined on mince and slices of quince,
　　Which they ate with a runcible spoon;
　　And hand in hand, on the edge of the sand,
　　They danced by the light of the moon,
　　The moon,
　　The moon,
　　They danced by the light of the moon.






■ 95 THE JUMBLIES
　　Edward Lear
　　They went to sea in a sieve, they did;
　　In a sieve they went to sea:
　　In spite of all their friends could say,
　　On a winter's morn, on a stormy day,
　　In a sieve they went to sea.
　　And when the sieve turned round and round,
　　And every one cried,"You'll all be drowned!"
　　They called aloud,"Our sieve ain't big;
　　But we don't care a button, we don't care a fig:
　　In a sieve we'll go to sea!"
　　Far and few, far and few,
　　Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
　　Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
　　And they went to sea in a sieve.
　　They sailed away in a sieve, they did,
　　In a sieve they sailed so fast,
　　With only a beautiful pea-green veil
　　Tied with a ribbon, by way of a sail,
　　To a small tobacco-pipe mast.
　　And every one said who saw tnem go,
　　"Oh! won't they be soon upset you know

　　For the sky is dark, and the voyage is long;
　　And, happen what may, it's extremely wrong
　　In a sieve to sail so fast."
　　Far and few, far and few,
　　Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
　　Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
　　And they went to sea in a sieve.
　　The water it soon came in, it did;
　　The water it soon came in:
　　So, to keep them dry, they wrapped their feet
　　In a pinky paper all folded neat;
　　And they fastened it down with a pin.
　　And they passed the night in a crockery-jar;
　　And each of them said,"How wise we are!
　　Though the sky be dark, and the voyage be long,
　　Yet we never can think we were rash or wrong,
　　While round in our sieve we spin.
　　Far and few, far and few,
　　Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
　　Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
　　And they went to sea in a sieve.
　　And all night long they sailed away;
　　And when the sun went down,
　　They whistled and warbled a moony song
　　To the echoing sound of a coppery gong,
　　In the shade of the mountains brown.
　　"O Timballoo! How happy we are
　　When we live in a sieve and a crockery-jar!
　　And all night long, in the moonlight pale,
　　We sail away with a pea-green sail
　　In the shade of the mountains brown."
　　Far and few, far and few,
　　Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
　　Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
　　And they went to sea in a sieve.
　　They sailed to the Western Sea, they did,—
　　To a land all covered with trees:
　　And they bought an owl, and a useful cart,
　　And a pound of rice, and a cranberry-tart,
　　And a hive of silvery bees;
　　And they bought a pig, and some green jackdaws,
　　And a lovely monkey with lollipop paws,
　　And seventeen bags of edelweiss tea,
　　And forty bottles of ring-bo-ree,
　　And no end of Stilton cheese.
　　Far and few, far and few,
　　Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
　　Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
　　And they went to sea in a sieve.
　　And in twenty years they all came back, —
　　In twenty years or more;
　　And every one said,"How tall they've grown!
　　For they've been to the Lakes, ＆ the Torrible
　　Zone
　　And the hills of the Chankly Bore."
　　And they drank their health, and gave them a
　　feast
　　Of dumplings made of beautiful yeast;
　　And every one said,"If we only live,
　　We, too, will go to sea in a sieve,
　　To the hills of the Chankly Bore."
　　Far and few, far and few,
　　Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
　　Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
　　And they went to sea in a sieve.






■ 96 THE LAND OF COUNTERPANE
　　Robert Louis Stevenson
　　When I was sick and lay a-bed,
　　I had two pillows at my head,
　　And all my toys beside me lay
　　To keep me happy all the day.
　　And sometimes for an hour or so
　　I watched my leaden soldiers go,
　　With different uniforms and drills,
　　Among the bed-clothes, through the hills;
　　And sometimes sent my ships in fleets
　　All up and down among the sheets;
　　Or brought my trees and houses out,
　　And planted cities all about.
　　I was the giant great and still
　　That sits upon the pillow-hill,
　　And sees before him,dale and plain,
　　The pleasant land of counterpane.






■ 97 BLOCK CITY
　　R obert Louis Stevenson
　　What are you able to build with your blocks

　　Castles and palaces, temples and docks
　　Rain may keep raining, and others go roam,
　　But I can be happy and building at home.
　　Let the sofa be mountains, the carpet be sea,
　　There I'll establish a city for me:
　　A kirk and a mill and a palace beside,
　　And a harbour as well where my vessels may ride.
　　Great is the palace with pillar and wall,
　　A sort of a tower on the top of it all,
　　And steps coming down in an orderly way
　　To where my toy vessels lie safe in the bay.
　　This one is sailing and that one is moored:
　　Hark to the song of the sailors on board!
　　And see on the steps of my palace, the kings
　　Coming and going with presents and things!
　　Now I have done with it, down let it go!
　　All in a moment the town is laid low
　　lock upon block lying scattered and free,
　　What is there left of my town by the sea

　　Yet as I saw it, I see it again,
　　The kirk and the palace, the ships and the men,
　　And as long as I live and where'er I may be,
　　I'll always remember my town by the sea.






■ 98 WYNKEN, BLYNKEN, AND NOD
　　Eug ene Field①
　　Wynken, Blynken, and Nod one night
　　Sailed off in a wooden shoe—
　　Sailed on a river of crystal light,
　　Into a sea of dew.
　　"Where are you going, and what do you wish
"
　　The old moon asked the three.
　　"We have come to fish for the herring-fish
　　That live in this beautiful sea;
　　Nets of silver and gold have we!"
　　Said Wynken, Blynken, and Nod.
　　The old moon laughed and sang a song
　　As they rocked in the wooden shoe,
　　And the wind that sped them all night long
　　Ruffled the waves of dew.
　　The little stars were the herring-fish
　　That lived in that beautiful sea—
　　"Now cast your nets wherever you wish—
　　But never afeard are we";
　　So cried the stars to the fishermen three:
　　Wynken, Blynken, and Nod.
　　And all night long their nets they threw
　　For the fish in the twinkling foam—
　　Then down from the sky came the wooden shoe,
　　Bringing the fishermen home;
　　’Twas all so pretty a sail, it seemed
　　As if it could not be;
　　And some folks thought'twas a dream they'd
　　dreamed
　　Of sailing that beautiful sea—
　　But I shall name you the fishermen three:
　　Wynken, Blynken, and Nod.
　　Wynken, Blynken, are two little eyes,
　　And Nod is a little head,
　　And the wooden shoe that sailed the skies
　　Is a wee one's trundle-bed.
　　So shut your eyes while Mother sings
　　Of wonderful sights that be,
　　And you shall see the beautiful things
　　As you rock in the misty sea,
　　Where the old shoe rocked the fishermen three ：
　　Wynked, Blynken, and Nod.






■ 99 THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELINA CHILD'S STORY
　　Robert Browning
　　Ⅰ
　　Hamelin Town's in Brunswick,
　　By famous Hanover city；
　　The river Weser, deep and wide,
　　Washes its wall on the southern side;
　　A pleasanter spot you never spied;
　　But, when begins my ditty,
　　Almost five hundred years ago,
　　To see the townsfolk suffer so
　　From vermin, was a pity.
　　Ⅱ
　　Rats!
　　They fought the dogs, and killed the cats,
　　And bit the babies in the cradles,
　　And ate the cheeses out of the vats,
　　And licked the soup from the cooks'own ladles,
　　Split open the kegs of salted sprats,
　　Made nests inside men's Sunday hats,
　　And even spoiled the women's chats,
　　By drowning their speaking
　　With shrieking and squeaking
　　In fifty different sharps and flats.
　　Ⅲ
　　At last the people in a body
　　To the Town Hall came flocking:
　　‘Tis clear,’cried they, ‘our Mayor's a noddy;
　　And as far our Corporation—shocking
　　To think we buy gowns lined with ermine
　　For dolts that can't or won't determine
　　What's best to rid us of our vermin!
　　You hope, because you're old and obese,
　　To find in the furry civic robe ease

　　Rouse up, Sirs! Give your brains a racking
　　To find the remedy we're lacking,
　　Or, sure as fate, we'll send you packing! ’
　　At this the Mayor and Corporation
　　Quaked with a mighty consternation.
　　Ⅳ
　　An hour they sate in council,
　　At length the Mayor broke silence:
　　‘For a guilder I'd my ermine gown sell;
　　I wish I were a mile hence!
　　It's easy to bid one rack one's brain—
　　I'm sure my poor head aches again
　　I've scratched it so, and all in vain.
　　Oh for a trap, a trap, a trap! ’
　　Just as he said this, what should hap
　　At the chamber door but a gentle tap

　　‘Bless us,’ cried the Mayor, ‘what's that
 ’
　　(With the Corporation as he sat,
　　Looking little though wondrous fat;
　　Nor brighter was his eye, nor moister
　　Than a too-long-opened oyster,
　　Save when at noon his paunch grew mutinous
　　For a plate of turtle green and glutinous)
　　‘Only a scraping of shoes on the mat

　　Anything like the sound of a rat
　　Makes my heart go pit-a-pat!’
　　Ⅴ
　　‘Come in!’—the Mayor cried, looking bigger:
　　And in did come the strangest figure!
　　His queer long coat from heel to head
　　Was half of yellow and half of red;
　　And he himself was tall and thin,
　　With sharp blue eyes, each like a pin,
　　And light loose hair, yet swarthy skin,
　　No tuft on cheek nor beard on chin,
　　But lips where smiles went out and in—
　　There was no guessing his kith and kin!
　　And nobody could enough admire
　　The tall man and his quaint attire:
　　Quoth one; ‘It's as my great-grand-sire,
　　Starting up at the Trump of Doom's tone,
　　Had walked this way from his painted tomb
　　stone!’
　　Ⅵ
　　He advanced to the council-table:
　　And, ‘Please your honours,’said he, ‘I'm able,
　　By means of a secret charm to draw
　　All creatures living beneath the sun,
　　That creep or swim or fly or run,
　　After me so as you never saw!
　　And I chiefly use my charm
　　On creatures that do people harm,
　　The mole and toad and newt and viper;
　　And people call me the Pied Piper.’
　　(And here they noticed round his neck
　　A scarf of red and yellow stripe,
　　To match with his coat of the selfsame cheque;
　　And at the scarf's end hung a pipe;
　　And his fingers, they noticed, were ever straying
　　As if impatient to be playing
　　Upon this pipe, as low it dangled
　　Over his vesture so old-fangled.)
　　‘Yet,’ said he,‘poor piper as I am,
　　In Tartary I freed the Cham,
　　Last June, from his huge swarms of gnats;
　　I eased in Asia the Nizam
　　Of a monstrous brood of vampyre-bats:
　　And as for what your brain bewilders,
　　If I can rid your town of rats
　　Will you give me a thousand guilders
’
　　‘One
 fifty thousand!’—was the exclamation
　　Of the astonished Mayor and Corporation.
　　Ⅶ
　　Into the street the Piper stept,
　　Smiling first a little smile,
　　As if he knew what magic slept
　　In his quiet pipe the while;
　　Then, like a musical adept,
　　To blow the pipe his lips he wrinkled,
　　And green and blue his sharp eyes twinkled
　　Like a candle-flame where salt is sprinkled;
　　And ere three shrill notes the pipe uttered,
　　You heard as if an army muttered;
　　And the muttering grew to a grumbling;
　　And the grumbling grew to a mighty rumbling;
　　And out of the houses the rats came tumbling.
　　Great rats, small rats, lean rats, brawny rats,
　　Brown rats, black rats, grey rats, tawny rats,
　　Grave old plodders, gay young friskers,
　　Fathers, mothers, uncles, cousins,
　　Cocking tails and pricking whiskers,
　　Families by tens and dozens,
　　Brothers, sisters, husbands, wives—
　　Followed the Piper for their lives.
　　From street to street he piped advancing,
　　And step for step they followed dancing,
　　Until they came to the river Weser
　　Wherein all plunged and perished!
　　Save one who, stout as Julius Caesar,
　　Swam across and lived to carry
　　(As he,. the manuscript he cherished)
　　To Rat-land home his commentary:
　　Which was, ‘At the first shrill notes of the pipe,
　　I heard a sound as of scraping tripe,
　　And putting apples, wondrous ripe,
　　Into a cider-press's gripe:
　　And a moving away of pickle-tub-boards,
　　And a leaving ajar of conserve-cup-boards,
　　And a drawing the corks of train-oil-flasks,
　　And a breaking the hoops of butter-casks;
　　And it seemed as if a voice
　　(Sweeter far than by harp or by psaltery
　　In breathed) called out, Oh rats, rejoice!
　　The world is grown to one vast drysaltery!
　　So, munch on, crunch on, take your
　　nuncheon,
　　Breakfast, supper, dinner, luncheon!
　　And just as a bulky sugar-puncheon,
　　All ready staved, like a great sun shone
　　Glorious scarce an inch before me,
　　Just as methought it said, Come, bore me!
　　—I found the Weser rolling o'er me.’
　　Ⅷ
　　You should have heard the Hamelin people
　　Ringing the bells till they rocked the steeple.
　　‘Go,’ cried the Mayor, ‘and get long poles!
　　Poke out the nests and block up the holes!
　　Consult with carpenters and builders,
　　And leave in our town not even a trace
　　Of the rats!’—when suddenly, up the face
　　Of the Piper perked in the marketplace,
　　With a, 'First, if you please, my thousand guilders!'
　　Ⅸ
　　A thousand guilders! The Mayor looked blue;
　　So did the Corporation too.
　　For council dinners made rare havoc
　　With Claret, Moselle, Vin-de-Grave, Hock;
　　And half the money would replenish
　　Their cellar's biggest butt with Rhenish.
　　To pay this sum to a wandering fellow
　　With a gipsy coat of red and yellow!
　　‘Beside,’ quoth the Mayor with a knowing wink,
　　‘Our business was done at the river's brink;
　　We saw with our eyes the vermin sink,
　　And what's dead can't come to life, I think.
　　So, friend, we're not the folks to shrink
　　From the duty of giving you something for drink,
　　And a matter of money to put in your poke;
　　But as for the guilders, what we spoke
　　Of them, as you very well know, was in joke.
　　Beside, our losses have made us thrifty.
　　A thousand guilders! Come, take fifty!’
　　Ⅹ
　　The piper's face fell, and he cried,
　　‘No trifling! I can't wait, beside!
　　I've promised to visit by dinner time
　　Bagdat, and accept the prime
　　Of the Head-Cook's pottage, all he's rich in,
　　For having left, in the Caliph's kitchen,
　　Of a nest of scorpions no survivor—
　　With him I proved no bargain-driver,
　　With you, don't think I'll bate a stiver!
　　And folks who put me in a passion
　　May find me pipe to another fashion.’
　　Ⅺ
　　‘How
’ cried the Mayor, ‘d'ye think I'll brook
　　Being worse treated than a Cook

　　Insulted by a lazy ribald
　　With idle pipe and vesture piebald

　　You threaten us, fellow
 Do your worst,
　　Blow your pipe there till you burst!’
　　Ⅻ
　　Once more he stept into the street;
　　And to his lips again
　　Laid his long pipe of smooth straight cane;
　　And ere he blew three notes (such sweet
　　Soft notes as yet musician's cunning
　　Never gave the enraptured air)
　　There was a rustling, that seemed like a bustling
　　Of merry crowds justling at pitching and hustling,
　　Small feet were pattering, wooden shoes clattering,
　　Little hands clapping and little tongues chattering,
　　And, like fowls in a farm-yard when barley is sca
　　ttering,
　　Out came the children running.
　　All the little boys and girls,
　　With rosy cheeks and flaxen curls,
　　And sparkling eyes and teeth like pearls,
　　Tripping and skipping, ran merrily after
　　The wonderful music with shouting and laughter.
　　ⅩⅢ
　　The Mayor was dumb, and the Council stood
　　As if they were changed into blocks of wood,
　　Unable to move a step, or cry
　　To the children merrily skipping by—
　　And could only follow with the eye
　　That joyous crowd at the Piper's back.
　　But how the Mayor was on the rack,
　　And the wretched Council's bosoms beat,
　　As the Piper turned from the High Street
　　To where the Weser rolled its waters
　　Right in the way of their sons and daughters!
　　However he turned from South to West,
　　And to Koppelberg Hill his steps addressed,
　　And after him the children pressed;
　　Great was the joy in every breast.
　　‘He never can cross that mighty top!
　　He's forced to let the piping drop,
　　And we shall see our children stop!’
　　When, lo, as they reached the mountain's side,
　　A wondrous portal opened wide,
　　As if a cavern was suddenly hollowed;
　　And the Piper advanced and the children followed,
　　And when all were in to the very last,
　　The door in the mountain-side shut fast.
　　Did I say, all
 No! One was lame,
　　And could not dance the whole of the way;
　　And in after years, if you would blame
　　His sadness, he was used to say,—-
　　‘It' s dull in our town since my playmates left!
　　I can't forget that I'm bereft
　　Of all the pleasant sights they see,
　　Which the Piper also promised me.
　　For he led us, he said, to a joyous land,
　　Joining the town and just at hand,
　　Where waters gushed and fruit-trees grew,
　　And flowers put forth a fairer hue,
　　And everything was strange and new;
　　The sparrows were brighter than peacocks here,
　　And their dogs outran our fallow deer,
　　And honey-bees had lost their stings,
　　And horses were born with eagles’wings:
　　And just as I became assured
　　My lame foot would be speedily cured,
　　The music stopped and I stood still,
　　And found myself outside the Hill,
　　Left alone against my will,
　　To go now limping as before,
　　And never hear of that country more!’
　　ⅩⅣ
　　Alas, alas for Hamelin!
　　There came into many a burgher's pate
　　A text which says, that Heaven's Gate
　　Opes to the Rich at as easy rate
　　As the needle' s eye takes a camel in!
　　The Mayor sent East, West, North and South,
　　To offer the Piper, by word of mouth,
　　Wherever it was men's lot to find him,
　　Silver and gold to his heart's content,
　　If he' d only return the way he went,
　　And bring the children behind him.
　　But when they saw’twas a lost endeavour,
　　And Piper and dancers were gone for ever,
　　They made a decree that lawyers never
　　Should think their records dated duly
　　If, after the day of the month and year,
　　These words did not as well appear,
　　‘And so long after what happened here
　　On the Twenty-second of July,
　　Thirteen hundred and seventy-six.’
　　And the better in memory to fix
　　The place of the children's last retreat,
　　They called it, the Pied Piper's Street—
　　Where any one playing on pipe or tabor
　　Was sure for the future to lose his labour.
　　Nor suffered they hostelry or tavern
　　To shock with mirth a street so solemn;
　　But opposite the place of the cavern
　　They wrote the story on a column,
　　And on the great Church-Window painted
　　The same, to make the world acquainted
　　How their children were stolen away;
　　And there it stands to this very day.
　　And I must not omit to say
　　That in Transylvania there's a tribe
　　Of alien people that ascribe
　　The outlandish ways and dress
　　On which their neighbours lay such stress,
　　To their fathers and mothers having risen
　　Out of some subterraneous prison
　　Into which they were trepanned
　　Long time ago in a mighty band
　　Out of Hamelin town in Brunswick land,
　　But how or why, they don't understand.
　　ⅩⅤ
　　So, Willy, let me and you be wipers
　　Of scores out with all men—especially pipers:
　　And, whether they pipe us free from rats or from
　　mice,
　　If we've promised them aught, let us keep our
　　promise.






■ 100 GOBLIN MARKET
　　Christina G eorgina Rossetti①
　　Morning and evening
　　Maids heard the goblins cry:
　　"Come buy our orchard fruits,
　　Come buy, come buy:
　　Apples and quinces,
　　Lemons and oranges,
　　Plump unpecked cherries,
　　Melons and raspberries,
　　Bloom-down-cheeked peaches,
　　Swart-headed mulberries,
　　Wild free-born cranberries,
　　Crab apples, dewberries,
　　Pine-apples, blackberries,
　　Apricots, strawberries;—
　　All ripe together
　　In summer weather,—
　　Morns that pass by,
　　Fair eves that fly;
　　Come buy, come buy:
　　Our grapes fresh from the vine,
　　Pomegranates full and fine,
　　Dates and sharp bullaces,
　　Rare pears and greengages,
　　Damsons and bilberries,
　　Taste them and try:
　　Currants and gooseberries,
　　Bright-fire-like barberries,
　　Figs to fill your mouth,
　　Citrons from the South,
　　Sweet to tongue and sound to eye;
　　Come buy, come buy."
　　Evening by evening
　　Among the brookside rushes,
　　Laura bowed her head to hear,
　　Lizzie veiled her blushes:
　　Crouching close together
　　In the cooling weather,
　　With clasping arms and cautioning lips,
　　With tingling cheeks and finger tips.
　　"Lie close," Laura said,
　　Pricking up her golden head:
　　"We must not look at goblin men,
　　We must not buy their fruits:
　　Who knows upon what soil they fed
　　Their hungry thirsty roots
 "
　　"Come buy,"call the goblins
　　Hobbling down the glen.
　　"Oh," cried Lizzie, "Laura, Laura,
　　You should not peep at goblin men."
　　Lizzie covered up her eyes,
　　Covered close lest they should look;
　　Laura reared her glossy head,
　　And whispered like the restless brook:
　　"Look, Lizzie, look, Lizzie,
　　Down the glen tramp little men.
　　One hauls a basket,
　　One bears a plate,
　　One lugs a golden dish
　　Of many pounds weight.
　　How fair the vine must grow
　　Whose grapes are so luscious;
　　How warm the wind must blow
　　Through those fruit bushes."
　　"No," said Lizzie: "No, no, no;
　　Their offers should not charm us,
　　Their evil gifts would harm us."
　　She thrust a dimpled finger
　　In each ear, shut eyes and ran:
　　Curious Laura chose to linger
　　Wondering at each merchant man.
　　One had a cat's face,
　　One whisked a tail,
　　One tramped at a rat's pace,
　　One crawled like a snail,
　　One like a wombat prowled obtuse and furry,
　　One like a ratel tumbled hurry skurry.
　　She heard a voice like voice of doves
　　Cooing all together:
　　They sounded kind and full of loves
　　In the pleasant weather.
　　Laura stretched her gleaming neck
　　Like a rush-imbedded swan,
　　Like a lily from the beck,
　　Like a moonlit poplar branch,
　　Like a vessel at the launch
　　When its last restraint is gone.
　　Backwards up the mossy glen
　　Turned and trooped the goblin men,
　　With their shrill repeated cry,
　　"Come buy, come buy."
　　When they reached where Laura was
　　They stood stock still upon the moss,
　　Leering at each other,
　　Brother with queer brother;
　　Signalling each other,
　　Brother with sly brother.
　　One set his basket down,
　　One reared his plate;
　　One began to weave a crown
　　Of tendrils, leaves, and rough nuts brown
　　(Men sell not such in any town);
　　One heaved the golden weight
　　Of dish and fruit to offer her:
　　"Come buy, come buy," was still their cry.
　　Laura stared but did not stir,
　　Longed but had no money:
　　The whisk-tailed merchant bade her taste
　　In tones as smooth as honey,
　　The cat-faced purr'd,
　　The rat-paced spoke a word
　　Of welcome, and the snail-paced even was heard;
　　One parrot-voiced and jolly
　　Cried "Pretty Goblin" still for "Pretty Polly";—
　　One whistled like a bird.
　　But sweet-tooth Laura spoke in haste:
　　"Good folk, I have no coin;
　　To take were to purloin:
　　I have no copper in my purse,
　　I have no silver either,
　　And all my gold is on the furze
　　That shakes in windy weather
　　Above the rusty heather."
　　"You have much gold upon your head,"
　　They answered all together:
　　"Buy from us with a golden curl."
　　She clipped a precious golden lock,
　　She dropped a tear more rare than pearl,
　　Then sucked their fruit globes fair or red:
　　Sweeter than honey from the rock,
　　Stronger than man-rejoicing wine,
　　Clearer than water flowed that juice;
　　She never tasted such before,
　　How should it cloy with length of use

　　She sucked and sucked and sucked the more
　　Fruits which that unknown orchard bore;
　　She sucked until her lips were sore;
　　Then flung the emptied rinds away
　　But gathered up one kernel stone,
　　And knew not was it night or day
　　As she turned home alone.
　　Lizzie met her at the gate
　　Full of wise upbraidings:
　　"Dear, you should not stay so late,
　　Twilight is not good for maidens;
　　Should not loiter in the glen
　　In the haunts of goblin men.
　　Do you not remember Jeanie,
　　How she met them in the moonlight,
　　Took their gifts both choice and many,
　　Ate their fruits and wore their flowers
　　Plucked from bowers
　　Where summer ripens at all hours

　　But ever in the moonlight
　　She pined and pined away;
　　Sought them by night and day,
　　Found them no more but dwindled and grew grey;
　　Then fell with the first snow,
　　While to this day no grass will grow
　　Where she lies low:
　　I planted daisies there a year ago
　　That never blow.
　　You should not loiter so."
　　"Nay, hush,"said Laura:
　　"Nay, hush, my sister:
　　I ate and ate my fill,
　　Yet my mouth waters still;
　　Tomorrow night I will
　　Buy more:" and kissed her:
　　"Have done with sorrow;
　　I'll bring you plums tomorrow
　　Fresh on their mother twigs,
　　Cherries worth getting;
　　You cannot think what figs
　　My teeth have met in,
　　What melons icy-cold
　　Piled on a dish of gold
　　Too huge for me to hold,
　　What peaches with a velvet nap,
　　Pellucid grapes without one seed:
　　Odorous indeed must be the mead
　　Whereon they grow, and pure the wave they drink
　　With lilies at the brink,
　　And sugar-sweet their sap."
　　Golden head by golden head,
　　Like two pigeons in one nest
　　Folded in each other's wings,
　　They lay down in their curtained bed:
　　Like two blossoms on one stem,
　　Like two flakes of new-fall'n snow,
　　Like two wands of ivory
　　Tipped with gold for awful kings.
　　Moon and stars gazed in at them,
　　Wind sang to them lullaby,
　　Lumbering owls forbore to fly,
　　Not a bat flapped to and fro
　　Round their nest:
　　Cheek to cheek and breast to breast
　　Locked together in one nest.
　　Early in the morning
　　When the first cock crowed his warning,
　　Neat like bees, as sweet and busy,
　　Laura rose with Lizzie:
　　Fetched in honey, milked the cows,
　　Aired and set to rights the house,
　　Kneaded cakes of whitest wheat,
　　Cakes for dainty mouths to eat,
　　Next churned butter, whipped up cream,
　　Fed their poultry, sat and sewed;
　　Talked as modest maidens should:
　　Lizzie with an open heart,
　　Laura in an absent dream,
　　One content, one sick in part;
　　One warbling for the mere bright day's delight,
　　One longing for the night.
　　At length slow evening came:
　　They went with pitchers to the reedy brook;
　　Lizzie most placid in her look,
　　Laura most like a leaping flame.
　　They drew the gurgling water from its deep;
　　Lizzie plucked purple and rich golden flags,
　　Then turning homewards said: "The sunset flushes
　　Those furthest loftiest crags;
　　Come, Laura, not another maiden lags,
　　No wilful squirrel wags,
　　The beasts and birds are fast asleep."
　　But Laura loitered still among the rushes
　　And said the bank was steep.
　　And said the hour was early still,
　　The dew not fall'n, the wind not chill:
　　Listening ever, but not catching
　　The customary cry,
　　"Come buy, come buy,"
　　With its iterated jingle
　　Of sugar-baited words:
　　Not for all her watching
　　Once discerning even one goblin
　　Racing, whisking, tumbling, hobbling;
　　Let alone the herds
　　That used to tramp along the glen,
　　In groups or single,
　　Of brisk fruit-merchant men.
　　Till Lizzie urged, "O Laura, come;
　　I hear the fruit-call but I dare not look:
　　You should not loiter longer at this brook:
　　Come with me home.
　　The stars rise, the moon bends her arc,
　　Each glowworm winks her spark,
　　Let us get home before the night grows dark:
　　For clouds may gather
　　Though this is summer weather,
　　Put out the lights and drench us through;
　　Then if we lost our way what should we do
"
　　Laura turned cold as stone
　　To find her sister heard that cry alone,
　　That goblin cry,
　　"Come buy our fruits, come buy."
　　Must she then buy no more such dainty fruit

　　Must she no more such succous pasture find,
　　Gone deaf and blind

　　Her tree of life drooped from the root:
　　She said not one word in her heart's sore ache;
　　But peering thro'the dimness, nought discerning,
　　Trudged home, her pitcher dripping all the way;
　　So crept to bed, and lay
　　Silent till Lizzie slept;
　　Then sat up in a passionate yearning,
　　And gnashed her teeth for baulked desire, and wept
　　As if her heart would break.
　　Day after day, night after night,
　　Laura kept watch in vain
　　In sullen silence of exceeding pain.
　　She never caught again the goblin cry:
　　"Come buy, come buy;"—
　　She never spied the goblin men
　　Hawking their fruits along the glen:
　　But when the noon waxed bright
　　Her hair grew thin and grey;
　　She dwindled, as the fair full moon doth turn
　　To swift decay and burn
　　Her fire away.
　　One day remembering her kernel-stone
　　She set it by a wall that faced the south;
　　Dewed it with tears, hoped for a root,
　　Watched for a waxing shoot,
　　But there came none;
　　It never saw the sun,
　　It never felt the trickling moisture run:
　　While with sunk eyes and faded mouth
　　She dreamed of melons, as a traveller sees
　　False waves in desert drouth
　　With shade of leaf-crowned trees,
　　And burns the thirstier in the sandful breeze.
　　She no more swept the house,
　　Tended the fowls or cows,
　　Brought water from the brook:
　　But sat down listless in the chimney-nook
　　And would not eat.
　　Tender Lizzie could not bear
　　To watch her sister's cankerous care
　　Yet not to share.
　　She night and morning
　　Caught the goblins'cry:
　　"Come buy our orchard fruits,
　　Come buy, come buy: "—
　　Beside the brook, along the glen,
　　She heard the tramp of goblin men,
　　The voice and stir
　　Poor Laura could not hear;
　　Longed to buy fruit to comfort her,
　　But feared to pay too dear.
　　She thought of Jeanie in her grave,
　　Who should have been a bride;
　　But who for joys brides hope to have
　　Fell sick and died
　　In her gay prime,
　　In earliest Winter time,
　　With the first glazing rime,
　　With the first snow-fall of crisp Winter time.
　　Till Laura dwindling
　　Seemed knocking at Death's door:
　　Then Lizzie weighed no more
　　Better and worse;
　　But put a silver penny in her purse,
　　Kissed Laura, crossed the heath with clumps of
　　furze
　　At twilight, halted by the brook:
　　And for the first time in her life
　　Began to listen and look.
　　Laughed every goblin
　　When they spied her peeping:
　　Came towards her hobbling,
　　Flying, running, leaping,
　　Puffing and blowing,
　　Chuckling, clapping, crowing,
　　Clucking and gobbling,
　　Mopping and mowing,
　　Full of airs and graces,
　　Pulling wry faces,
　　Demure grimaces,
　　Cat-like and rat-like,
　　Ratel and wombat-like,
　　Snail-paced in a hurry,
　　Parrot-voiced and whistler,
　　Helter skelter, hurry skurry,
　　Chattering like magpies,
　　Fluttering like pigeons,
　　Gliding like fishes,—
　　Hugged her and kissed her:
　　Squeezed and caressed her:
　　Stretched up their dishes,
　　Panniers, and plates:
　　"Look at our apples
　　Russet and dun,
　　Bob at our cherries,
　　Bite at our peaches,
　　Citrons and dates,
　　Grapes for the asking,
　　Pears red with basking
　　Out in the sun,
　　Plums on their twigs;
　　Pluck them and suck them,
　　Pomegranates, figs."—
　　"Good folk,"said Lizzie,
　　Mindful of Jeanie:
　　"Give me much and many:"
　　Held out her apron,
　　Tossed them her penny.
　　"Nay, take a seat with us,
　　Honour and eat with us,"
　　They answered grinning:
　　"Our feast is but beginning.
　　Night yet is early,
　　Warm and dew-pearly,
　　Wakeful and starry:
　　Such fruits as these
　　No man can carry;
　　Half their bloom would fly,
　　Half their dew would dry,
　　Half their flavour would pass by.
　　Sit down and feast with us,
　　Be welcome guest with us,
　　Cheer you and rest with us."—
　　"Thank you," said Lizzie: "But one waits
　　At home alone for me:
　　So without further parleying,
　　If you will not sell me any
　　Of your fruits though much and many,
　　Give me back my silver penny
　　I tossed you for a fee."—
　　They began to scratch their pates,
　　No longer wagging, purring,
　　But visibly demurring,
　　Grunting and snarling.
　　One called her proud,
　　Cross-grained, uncivil;
　　Their tones waxed loud,
　　Their looks were evil.
　　Lashing their tails
　　They trod and hustled her,
　　Elbowed and jostled her,
　　Clawed with their nails,
　　Barking, mewing, hissing, mocking,
　　Tore her gown and soiled her stocking,
　　Twitched her hair out by the roots,
　　Stamped upon her tender feet,
　　Held her hands and squeezed their fruits
　　Against her mouth to make her eat.
　　White and golden Lizzie stood,
　　Like a lily in a flood,—
　　Like a rock of blue-veined stone
　　Lashed by tides obstreperously,—
　　Like a beacon left alone
　　In a hoary roaring sea,
　　Sending up a golden fire,—
　　Like a fruit-crowned orange-tree
　　White with blossoms honey-sweet
　　Sore beset by wasp and bee,—
　　Like a royal virgin town
　　Topped with gilded dome and spire
　　Close beleaguered by a fleet
　　Mad to tug her standard down.
　　One may lead a horse to water,
　　Twenty cannot make him drink.
　　Though the goblins cuffed and caught her,
　　Coaxed and fought her,
　　Bullied and besought her,
　　Scratched her, pinched her black as ink,
　　Kicked and knocked her,
　　Mauled and mocked her,
　　Lizzie uttered not a word;
　　Would not open lip from lip
　　Lest they should cram a mouthful in:
　　But laughed in heart to feel the drip
　　Of juice that syrupped all her face,
　　And lodged in dimples of her chin,
　　And streaked her neck which quaked like curd.
　　At last the evil people
　　Worn out by her resistance
　　Flung back her penny, kicked their fruit
　　Along whichever road they took,
　　Not leaving root or stone or shoot;
　　Some writhed into the ground,
　　Some dived into the brook
　　With ring and ripple,
　　Some scudded on the gale without a sound,
　　Some vanished in the distance.
　　In a smart, ache, tingle,
　　Lizzie went her way;
　　Knew not was it night or day;
　　Sprang up the bank, tore thro' the furze,
　　Threaded copse and dingle,
　　And heard her penny jingle
　　Bouncing in her purse,—
　　Its bounce was music to her ear.
　　She ran and ran
　　As if she feared some goblin man
　　Dogged her with gibe or curse
　　Or something worse:
　　But not one goblin skurried after,
　　Nor was she pricked by fear;
　　The kind heart made her windy-paced
　　That urged her home quite out of breath with
　　haste
　　And inward laughter.
　　She cried "Laura," up the garden,
　　"Did you miss me

　　Come and kiss me.
　　Never mind my bruises,
　　Hug me, kiss me, suck my juices
　　Squeezed from globin fruits for you,
　　Goblin pulp and goblin dew.
　　Eat me, drink me, love me;
　　Laura, make much of me:
　　For your sake I have braved the glen
　　And had to do with goblin merchant men."
　　Laura started from her chair,
　　Flung her arms up in the air,
　　Clutched her hair:
　　"Lizzie, Lizzie, have you tasted
　　For my sake the fruit forbidden

　　Must your light like mine be hidden,
　　Your young life like mine be wasted,
　　Undone in mine undoing
　　And ruined in my ruin,
　　Thirsty, cankered, goblin-ridden
"—
　　She clung about her sister,
　　Kissed and kissed and kissed her:
　　Tears once again
　　Refreshed her shrunken eyes,
　　Dropping like rain
　　After long sultry drouth;
　　Shaking with aguish fear, and pain,
　　She kissed and kissed her with a hungry mouth.
　　Her lips began to scorch,
　　That juice was wormwood to her tongue,
　　She loathed the feast:
　　Writhing as one possessed she leaped and sung,
　　Rent all her robe, and wrung
　　Her hands in lamentable haste,
　　And beat her breast.
　　Her locks streamed like the torch
　　Borne by a racer at full speed,
　　Or like the mane of horses in their flight,
　　Or like an eagle when she stems the light
　　Straight toward the sun,
　　Or like a caged thing freed,
　　Or like a flying flag when armies run.
　　Swift fire spread through her veins, knocked at
　　her heart,
　　Met the fire smouldering there
　　And overbore its lesser flame;
　　She gorged on bitterness without a name:
　　Ah! fool, to choose such part
　　Of soul-consuming care!
　　Sense failed in the mortal strife:
　　Like the watch-tower of a town
　　Which an earthquake shatters down,
　　Like a lightning-stricken mast,
　　Like a wind-uprooted tree
　　Spun about,
　　Like a foam-topped waterspout
　　Cast down headlong in the sea,
　　She fell at last;
　　Pleasure past and anguish past,
　　Is it death or is it life

　　Life out of death.
　　That night long Lizzie watched by her,
　　Counted her pulse's flagging stir,
　　Felt for her breath,
　　Held water to her lips, and cooled her face
　　With tears and fanning leaves:
　　But when the first birds chirped about their eaves,
　　And early reapers plodded to the place
　　Of golden sheaves,
　　And dew-wet grass
　　Bowed in the morning winds so brisk to pass,
　　And new buds with new day
　　Opened of cup-like lilies on the stream,
　　Laura awoke as from a dream,
　　Laughed in the innocent old way,
　　Hugged Lizzie but not twice or thrice;
　　Her gleaming locks showed not one thread of grey,
　　Her breath was sweet as May
　　And light danced in her eyes.
　　Days, weeks, months, years
　　Afterwards, when both were wives
　　With children of their own;
　　Their mother-hearts beset with fears,
　　Their lives bound up in tender lives;
　　Laura would call the little ones
　　And tell them of her early prime,
　　Those pleasant days long gone
　　Of not-returning time:
　　Would talk about the haunted glen,
　　The wicked, quaint fruit-merchant men,
　　Their fruits like honey to the throat
　　But poison in the blood;
　　(Men sell not such in any town:)
　　Would tell them how her sister stood
　　In deadly peril to do her good,
　　And win the fiery antidote:
　　Then joining hands to little hands
　　Would bid them cling together,
　　"For there is no friend like a sister
　　In calm or stormy weather;
　　To cheer one on the tedious way,
　　To fetch one if one goes astray,
　　To lift one if one totters down,
　　To strengthen whilst one stands,"



　　"



　　Herbert Strang (selected & arranged): One Hundred Poems
　　for Children (Oxford University Press, 1958).
　　Herbert Strang (selected & arranged): One Hundred Poems
　　for Boys (Oxford University Press, 1958).
　　Herbert Strang (selected & arranged): One Hundred Poems
　　for Girls (Oxford University Press, 1955).
　　Francis T. Palgrave (selected & arranged): The Children's
　　Treasury of Lyrical Poetry (Macmillan & Co., London
　　& N. Y., 1905).
　　Arthur Quiller-Couch (ed.): The Oxford Book of English
　　Verse (Oxford University Press, l948).
　　Francis T. Palgrave (selected & arranged): The Golden
　　Treasury of The Best Songs and Lyrical Poems in the
　　English Language (Oxford University Press, 1929).
　　John Hayward (ed.): The Penguin Book of English Verse
　　(Wyman & Sons Ltd., London, 1956).
　　Charles W. Eliot (ed.): Harvard Classics, English Poetry in 3
　　Volumes (P. F. Collier & Son Co., N. Y., 1910).
　　William Rose Ben6t & Conrad Aiken(ed.): An Anthology of
　　Famous English and American Poetry (Random House,
　　Inc., N. Y., 1945).
　　W. Peacock (ed): The World's Classics, English Verse, VoLIV
　　(Oxford University Press, 1934).
　　Mark van Doren (ed.): An Anthology of World Poetry, Revised &
　　enlarged ed. (Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., N. Y., 1964).
　　M. H. Abrams (gen. ed.): The Norton Anthology of English Litera
　　ture, Fifth Edition Volume 2 (W. W. Norton & Co., N. Y.,
　　London, 1986).
　　Walter Blair, etc.(ed.): The Literature of the United States in 2
　　Volumes(Scott, Foresman & Co., Glenview, Illinois, 1971).
　　Helen McDonnell, etc. (ed.): England in Literature (Scott,
　　Foresman & Co., Glenview, Illinois, 1979).
　　James E. Miller, Jr., etc. (ed.): United States in Literature (Scott,
　　Foresman & Co., Glenview, Illinois, 1979).
　　Helen McDonnell, etc.(ed.): Literature and Life (Scott, Foresman
　　& Co., Glenview, Illinois, 1979).
　　Nancy Sullivan (selected): The Treasury of American Poetry
　　(International Collectors Library, Garden City, N. Y., 1978).
　　W. J. Craig (ed.): The Complete Works of William Shakespeare
　　(Henry Pordes, London, 1984).
　　David V. Erdman (ed.): The Complete Poetry and Prose of
　　William Blake, Newly Revised. Edition(Anchor Press /
　　Doubleday, N. Y., 1982).
　　James Barke (ed.): Poems and Songs of Robert Burns
　　(Fontana / Collins, London, 1984).
　　William Knight (ed.): The Poetical Works of William Wordsworth
　　(William Paterson, Edinburgh, 1882).
　　William Michael Rossetti (ed.): The Poetical Works of Samuel
　　Taylor Coleridge (E. Moxon, Son & Co., London).
　　Thomas Hutchinson (ed.): The Complete Poetical Works of Percy
　　Bysshe Shelley (Oxford University Press, 1952).
　　Felicia Dorothea Hemans: The Poetical Works of Felicia
　　D.Hemans (William Blackwood & Sons, Edinburgh, London,
　　1852)
　　Elizabeth Barrett Browning: Poems by E. B. Browning (George
　　Routledge & Sons, Glasgow & N. Y., 1887).
　　Henry Wadsworth Longfellow: The Poetical Works of H. W.
　　Longfellow (Ward, Lock & Co., Ltd., London & Melbourne).
　　Robert Browning: Poems of R. Browning (Henry Frowde, Oxford
　　University Press, London, N. Y., 1909).
　　Edward Lear: Nonsense Songs and Lauphable Lyrics (Peter
　　Pauper Press, N. Y.).
　　Walt Whitman: Complete Poems and Prose of Walt Whitman
　　(Furguson Bro. & Co., Philadelphia, 1881).
　　Robert Louis Stevenson: The Works of Robert L. Stevenson,
　　Lothian Edition, Vo1.XVII: A Child's Garden of Verses
　　(Eveleigh Nash & Grayson Ltd., London).
　　Richard J. Finneran (ed.): The Poems of William B. Yeats, A New
　　Edition (Macmillan, London, 1984).
　　Hilaire Belloc: Collected Verse (Harmondsworth, Middlesex,
　　Penguin Books, 1958).
　　Walter de la Mare: Collected Rhymes and Verses (Faber and
　　Faber Ltd, London, 1970).
　　Eleanor Farjeon: Sonnets and Poems by E. Farjeon (B. H.
　　Blackwell, Oxford, 1918).
　　A. A. Milne: When We Were Very Young (Dell Publishing Co.
　　Inc., N. Y., 1952).
　　A. A. Milne: Now We Are Six (Dell Publishing Co. Inc., N. Y.,
　　1955).
　　Ted Hughes: Meet My Folks (Faber and Faber Ltd., London,
　　Boston, 1987).
　　Margaret Drabble (ed.): The Oxford Companion to English
　　Literature, New Edition (Oxford University Press, 1985).


